
"More than 5,000 people, mostly civilians and overwhelmingly Muslims, were killed in jihadi attacks in November, according to a study documenting the toll of Islamist violence worldwide. About 60% of these deaths were caused by the militant groups Islamic State and Boko Haram, suggesting a transformation in the nature of jihadi groups from terrorists to more conventional forces that are fighting to gain or hold territory against state armies, the report by the International Centre for the Study of Radicalisation and the BBC, said.       Drawing on local media sources, non-government organisations and the BBCs monitoring services, the study found that extremist groups adhering to the austere Salafist ideology carried out 664 attacks that killed 5,042 people in November. Iraq suffered 1,770 deaths, but the deadliest attacks were carried out in Nigeria, where just 27 incidents took 786 lives. The battle zone between Syria and Iraq where Islamic State has dug in saw the largest number of fatalities, and the death toll in Yemen, Somalia and Pakistan also stretched into the hundreds.       Excluding the jihadis themselves and victims of unknown origin, the authors found just over half of those killed in Novembers attacks were civilians. Given context and location, the vast majority of jihadist victims is Muslim, the report said.       Most deaths were caused by bombings but the figure is dwarfed by the combined number of fatalities from shootings, ambushes and executions.       Al-Qaida, which was thought to be in terminal decline following the killing of Osama Bin Laden, killed 410 people. The figures showed jihadism was a movement in the middle of a transformation, the authors said, with the deadliest groups now embracing strategies to hold and govern territory against the armies of weak or failing states."
"British war poets romanticised the attraction of a Blighty wound: a non-life-threatening injury considered serious enough to merit a safe passage home. The term was used during the First World War when personal calamity, sometimes self-inflicted, offered the chance of a state-aided future in a land fit for heroes, well away from the mud and slaughter of a foreign field. The macabre notion sprang to my mind last week when, a century after the start of that savage conflict, officials suggested that desperate migrants were deliberately risking a Blighty as they tried to enter Europe illegally. Those who boarded boats skippered by people smugglers to get across the Mediterranean were, it was argued, actually hoping to get into grave difficulty, so as to be rescued and then fast forwarded to their desired asylum destinations, including the UK. Hundreds of thousands have embarked on the sea crossing this year alone, with many picked up by the Italian navy as part of its countrys Mare Nostrum (Our Sea) initiative. Many of them have died, or been horribly wounded, but evidently not enough to move the British government. It is convinced that a humanitarian operation aimed at rescuing people is actually motivating them to travel in the first place and should thus be abandoned. Baroness Anelay, the Conservative foreign office minister, told the House of Lords that the mission should be dropped because it was encouraging more migrants to attempt the dangerous sea crossing and thereby leading to more tragic and unnecessary deaths. The flaws in such thinking might have been clear to Lady Anelay if, like me, she had met some of the surviving victims of last years Lampedusa shipwreck in which at least 360 people died. As well as the psychological trauma of seeing loved ones, including young children, perish around them as all struggled to stay afloat, many had suffered severe burns caused by diesel fires and lung and gastric infections, to add to a long list of other injuries and ailments. It was the unbridled horror that unfolded off the coast of the Italian island in 2013 that directly led to Mare Nostrum, but hugely perilous migrant sea crossings continue despite such shipwrecks, not because of them. Personal disfigurement, psychological agony and mass bereavement are, in some cases, certainly a price people would willingly pay to achieve a fresh chance in life in a foreign country. Where Lady Anelay and her ministerial colleagues get it wrong is in their depiction of migrants as desperate, broken victims who have nothing to offer. Such woefully misguided reasoning was articulated by Natacha Bouchart, the mayor of Calais, in the House of Commons last week, when she said that the migrants queuing up in her port to hide on Dover-bound lorries were prepared to die to reach the weekly benefits of Â£36 that are given to migrants or asylum seekers by Britain. Referring to a British El Dorado, Bouchart declared that social security payments, free homes and undeclared cash in hand were the dynamic of global migration in the 21st century. The logical response, according to this miserably insular, unambitious view, should be police crackdowns, tougher border controls, deportations and a host of other repressive cliches, up to and including leaving drowning migrants to sort their own problems out. Rather than immigration from war-torn countries being motivated by the promise of state handouts, most of these risky journeys represent a powerful determination to overcome adversity, no matter what the danger. The majority of those boarding leaking Mediterranean boats or sleeping rough at the start of another Pas-de-Calais winter want to be members of a functioning society to which they can contribute. It isÂ politicians, suggesting that peopleÂ aspire toÂ the promiseÂ of Â£5.14 a day,Â perhaps supplemented by a few pounds a week on the black market, whoÂ forgeÂ the stereotype of migrants as parasites. The rabble-rousers display no interest in peoples back story “ the experience of war or persecution shared by those dislodged from Africa, and those who come from countries such as Afghanistan, Iraq and Syria. Instead, all are blamed for the swamping process, also levelled at a host of other undesirables, ranging from health tourists to criminal gangs from the old Iron Curtain countries. The truth is that Britain is not a racist country and the prejudiced rhetoric increasingly prevalent among representatives of both established and marginal parties does not reflect the popular view. In fact, the UK has always been admirably welcoming. The terms being used by politicians have no place in a richly diverse nation moulded by centuries of immigration. As a French national whose background involves immigration from decolonised Algeria, I feel that Britain is certainly more tolerant than France. There the Front National, whose founder and leading MEP is a convicted racist and antisemite, is accepted as a mainstream party with the potential to supply a president. It is a country where Manuel Valls, Frances then nominally socialist interior minister, last year calmly suggested that the solution to illegal camps and street crime was to deport all Roma Gypsies because they have no hope of integrating, adding: We are not here to welcome these people. Soon after his overtly racist statement about mainly EU passport holders, Valls was appointed prime minister. The Tory defence secretary, Michael Fallon, last week used the word swamped in relation to eastern European immigrants and, despite apologising, was praised by former Labour home secretary David Blunkett, who said Fallon was voicing the concerns of ordinary voters. The reality is that ordinary voters have always offered a place in British society to the downtrodden underdog “ ones who want to start a business, to train as medics, to serve their new communities. There are all kinds of opportunities for those prepared to work. The country is by no means a magnet for refugees anyway: it received just under 30,000 asylum applications in 2013. France had more than double that number and Germany more than five times. As throughout history, those displaced from their own societies “ for whatever reason “ seek a haven where they can prosper. Those who wrote about the Blighty wounds so eloquently also evoked the small-town nationalistic hatreds that contributed so much to the slaughter of the trenches. There is nothing wrong with patriotism, or a sensible immigration policy, but when government ministers display a callous disregard for drowning migrants they have clearly lost all sense of what being British really means."
"The fast-growing competition between international news broadcasters for the eyeballs of the world “ the battle for so-called ""soft power"" “ has just got tougher. A few months after BBC director general Tony Hall announced a target of 500 million users for its international services by 2022 “ twice what it has now “ the English language service of its Qatari state-owned rival, al-Jazeera, is recruiting around 100 extra journalists, the news network's second major expansion drive in a year.Following cuts to the BBC World Service (now funded by the corporation rather than a foreign office grant in aid) and in an intensely competitive global market that includes RT (Russia Today) and the burgeoning China Central Television (CCTV), it will be no easy task. ""It's a very bold ambition, really good luck to them [the BBC],"" says Al Anstey, the former ITN and Associated Press executive who oversees al-Jazeera English, the seven-year-old channel which is now in 250m homes in more than 130 countries around the world.At a time when many commercial news networks are laying off staff, Anstey's channel will look to recruit across the board, both at its Doha headquarters and among its 80 global bureaux. Anstey says he will use the new recruits to boost the channel's ""core strength of eyewitness reporting"". Al-Jazeera won awards and big audiences for its close-up coverage of the Arab spring protests “ including the Royal Television Society's news channel of the year award in 2012, beating the BBC and Sky News “ but has also faced long-standing allegations of bias, charges Anstey rejects.Right now his concerns are closer to home and centred on the plight of three al-Jazeera English journalists held by the authorities in Egypt. Canadian citizen Mohamed Fahmy, the channel's Cairo bureau chief, veteran Australian reporter Peter Greste and freelance producer Baher Mohamed were arrested last month, accused of spreading ""false news"" and being members of a ""terrorist cell"". A statement signed by representatives of more than 50 international media organisations last week called for their ""immediate release"" and said the arrest had ""cast a cloud over press and media freedom in Egypt"".Al-Jazeera has come under increasing pressure in Egypt since former president Mohamed Morsi was deposed, with its Egyptian outlet accused of being sympathetic to the Muslim Brotherhood. Anstey describes the allegations as ""extraordinary"". ""The team and our coverage from Egypt upheld the highest standards of journalism right the way through. We refute these allegations wholeheartedly,"" he says. ""If you cover something it does not mean you are sympathetic to it. We have to get the message out there that journalism requires challenging all sides. The challenge to journalism as a whole is extreme.""Al Jazeera has previously faced challenges in Iraq and China ” ""effectively thrown out"", says Anstey ” as well as Egypt, hiring London law firm Carter Ruck last year after its Cairo offices were closed, journalists deported and one of its satellites jammed.As well as boosting its bureaux and expanding its reach in places like India and Latin America, Anstey is also looking to up his channel's digital presence, online and on second screens, with interactive packages in which viewers can choose which narrative to follow. ""We already have the highest quality content gathered by a fantastically diverse team around the world. If you break up the constituent parts that go into a two-minute television package, what you have that hits the cutting room floor is gold dust,"" he says. That ""gold dust"" “ longer interviews, more informal chats with the correspondent, explainers “ can be ""tailored to different platforms and provide a much richer resource depending on which platform you are looking at"", adds Anstey. ""It's about changing the mindset.""The expansion of al-Jazeera English comes less than six months after the launch of al-Jazeera America, following its $500m purchase of Al Gore's Current TV. Demonised by much of the American media “ the ""voice of the enemy"", according to former Fox News talkshow host Glenn Beck “ its launch was not without a hitch, as it was initially dropped (and then reinstated) by the cable giant Time Warner. It is now in around 55m US homes, more than 10 times the figure previously achieved by al-Jazeera English.""It took the DNA of us and the wider network and applied that in the context of the United States,"" says Anstey. ""When you look at the popularisation of news, the ratings-chasing and commercialisation, in America and elsewhere, it lost viewers. We are holding true to the provision of reliable information, eyewitness reporting and challenging all sides.""One critic said al-Jazeera America was ""something entirely new to cable news: it is considered"". But along with the bouquets comes a lingering suspicion in some quarters that its ownership, by the billionaire Emir of Qatar, means al-Jazeera is not free to report critically on that country, or diverge too far from its foreign policy. US embassy cables released by WikiLeaks suggested Qatar was using the Arabic channel as a diplomatic bargaining chip.Then there was the allegation, in 2012, that its director of news had stepped in to ensure a speech made to the UN by Qatar's then emir, Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa al-Thani, led its English channel's coverage of a debate on Syria. ""It was a normal editorial decision,"" counters Anstey, who describes another speech made on the same day by Barack Obama as a ""good speech but not as good a news line"" as the emir of Qatar calling for military action against Syria.""The allegation of someone from outside the channel asking or intervening was simply not the case. It was a normal editorial decision. We treat Qatar like every other country in the world. There has never been any pressure to run a particular story in a particular way. If we were to veer one degree off the integrity of our journalism, our audience would and should switch us off.""Although his channel is funded by the Qatari government, Anstey insists there is ""total separation between church and state. Everything we do, if we want to expand, goes through a normal budgetary and editorial process, and we hold to our budget, exactly as I did when I was head of foreign at ITN,"" he says. ""When you compare our budget to the big players out there, ours is very sensible.""""We are looking at our revenues in order to build the proportion we are able to fund. We want to build our audience and capitalise on our viewership, but that will never jeopardise the core integrity of the content. We have a massive opportunity to build on the bedrock of what we have achieved. We need to take ourselves to the next level."""
"The body was washed ashore on a westerly breeze, faceless and bloated to such an extent that it didnt fit into its clothes any more. Several others followed, tangled up with seaweed and accompanied by the wooden remnants of a boat. The locals of Zuwara, in western Libya, know what to do. From the day of the shipwreck a few miles off the coast last Thursday in which almost 150 migrants died, the beach was full of volunteers. So far we have recovered 60 bodies, said a local security chief, Mohamed Bedrush. The 80 survivors from Syria and several sub-Saharan countries were treated in hospital. Within two days all had been discharged and had disappeared. Some might be already looking for a smuggler to embark on the next boat heading to Europe, said one of Bedrushs security team. The people of Zuwara have done this before, but that doesnt mean they are used to it, or happy that their town has turned into the graveyard of African migrants seeking a brighter future in Europe. There is growing anger against the smugglers “ vampires, as they are known “ who are making good money out of a macabre business. More than 2,500 people have died in the Mediterranean sea this year, victims of unscrupulous smugglers who pack inadequate vessels with hundreds of migrants, often fully expecting not to get the boat back again. Zuwara is at the hub of the trafficking business in Libya. During the Gaddafi era, businessmen from his inner circle ran the lucrative trade, according to Ayoob Sufian, a political activist. After the 2011 revolution the traffic decreased, but the collapse of Libya this year has accelerated it again, Sufian said. Local authorities have started deploying large numbers of security guards to stand up to the smugglers, though often it is the migrants who will bear the brunt. In mid-September, 700 migrants were caught and driven out of the city, including 70 from Bangladesh, Eritrea, Nigeria, Somalia and Sudan found crammed into a single dark storage room. Zuwara is not going to surrender to these vampires, said Musaddag Jihesh, the head of a new crisis committee formed to tackle the smugglers. We are here today to tell the smugglers that youve tried our patience to its limit. But there is only so much they can do. Locals admit that the sheer number of migrants is too much for the capacity of their security force. Zuwaras new mayor, Hafed Jumua, has appealed to the Italian government for help, as this is an international issue and we can not face it locally. But no one is holding their breath. In the short term, the crackdown has resulted in smugglers raising their fees to $1,200 (Â£750) and shifting the locus of their operation. There is no shortage of clients, said one smuggler, who did not wish to give his name. It is a big market."
"Anissa Helou moved into her Shoreditch apartment, with large loft room, at the close of the 20th century, ""having decided to change my life"". She'd worked in art (as Sotheby's representative in the Middle East and adviser to Kuwaiti royalty) and had amassed a large collection of kitchenware. ""Every space in my terraced house in Clapham had 18th- and 19th-century cutlery boxes, bowls, trenchers, spice boxes, mortars, tea caddies, gourds."" But Helou sold the bulk of the collection, and the house, to reinvent herself as ""a food writer, living, cooking and writing in my dream loft"".This ex-foundry's mighty room provided enough open space for Helou's office corner, large modern book units (with 10-step ladder) housing her cookbook collection, a dining area for 10, and a sizeable minimalist Swiss kitchen. A five-metre wide frosted glass wall-cupboard barely manages to hold Helou's jars of ingredients acquired across the Middle East, north Africa and beyond: ""¦ this is green wheat from my mum in Beirut, za'atar from Syria, oregano from Pantelleria, grades of Aleppo pepper from Turkey, tins of beautiful saffron bunches.""Helou pours a glass of Chateau Musar from Lebanon, where she was born, and places it down on a pop-arty coaster of Omar Sharif. All her utensils, gadgets, baking trays, bowl of vibrant sumac et al are meticulously arranged. ""I've allowed my desk over there to get messy but I'm terribly anal in the kitchen. I do have a problem with people who don't clear up as&nbsp;they&nbsp;cook.""There is slick precision here and much good taste and displays of dark humour “ cocktail sticks fashioned like carpenter's nails; a figure of a Parisian artist's model, smoking with breasts exposed; and her magnetic ""American Psycho"" knife rack. A sharp Turkish meat cleaver is displayed close to the ebony dining table.""I've lived here for over 13 years. But I've now decided to get a smaller London flat while building my dream house, on a plot I've bought in Sicily with a sea view and hopefully designed by [my friend] Zaha Hadid."""
"They couldnt keep away. Barely two years after US forces were withdrawn from Iraq, theyre back in action. Barack Obama has now become the fourth US president in aÂ row to launch military action in Iraq. Were now into the sixth day of US air attacks on the self-styled Islamic State, formerly known as Isis “ the sectarian fundamentalists who have taken over vast tracts of SunniÂ Iraq and are carrying out vicious ethnic cleansing against minorities in the north. The media and political drumbeat is growing louder for Britain to move from humanitarian aid drops to join the military campaign. France has announced it will be arming Iraqi Kurdish forces. There are already 800 US troops back onÂ Iraqi territory. Without a trace of irony, Colonel Tim Collins, who famously claimed on the eve of the 2003 invasion that British troops were occupying Iraq to liberate it, yesterday led the call for yet another military intervention. If ever there was a case for another Anglo-American bombing campaign, some say, this must surely be it. Graphic reports of the suffering of tens of thousands of Yazidi refugees on Mount Sinjar and the horrific violence that has driven the Christians of Qaraqosh from their homes have aroused global sympathy. The victims of this sectarian onslaught need urgent humanitarian aid and refuge. But the idea that the states that invaded and largely destroyed Iraq at the cost of hundreds of thousands of lives should claim the cause of humanitarianism for yet another military intervention in Iraq beggars belief. If the aim were solely to provide air cover for the evacuation of Yazidis from Sinjar, there are several regional powers that could deliver it. The Iraqi government itself could be given the means to do the job “ something its US sponsors have denied it until now. In fact, the force that has done most so far to rescue Yazidis has been the Kurdish PKK, regarded as a terrorist organisation by the US, EU and Turkey. But after decades of lawless unilateralism, any armed intervention for genuine humanitarian protection clearly has to be authorised by the United Nations to have any credibility. As the Labour MP Diane Abbott put it, thats what the UN is for “ and authorisation could be quickly agreed by the security council. But of course its not just about the Yazidis or the Christians. As Obama has made clear, theyre something of a side issue compared with the defence of the increasingly autonomous Iraqi Kurdistan “ long a key US and unofficial Israeli ally “ and American interests in its oil boom capital Irbil, in particular. The US is back in Iraq for the long haul, the president signalled, spelling out that his aim is to prevent IS establishing some sort of caliphate through Syria and Iraq “ which is exactly what the group regards itself as having done. The danger of the US, Britain and others being drawn again into the morass of a disintegrating state they themselves took apart is obvious. IS, then known as al-Qaida in Iraq, itself effectively arrived in the country in 2003 on the backs of US and British tanks. The idea that the states responsible for at least 500,000 deaths, 4 million refugees, mass torture and ethnic cleansing in Iraq over the past decade should now present themselves as having a responsibility to protect Iraqis verges on satire. The majority of Iraqs million-strong Christian community was in fact forced out of the country under US-British occupation. The state sectarianism that triggered the Sunni revolt and rise of IS in Iraq “ the ultimate blowback “ was built into the political structures set up by George Bush. Britain and the US “ which didnt want to take sides when Egypts coup leaders carried out one of the largest killings of demonstrators in a single day in history last summer “ are the last countries on Earth to bring humanitarian relief to Iraq. That doesnt mean that they dont have a responsibility to provide aid. But the record of western humanitarian intervention over the past two decades isnt a happy one. In 1991, no-fly zones in Iraq allowed massacres of Shia rebels in the south and only functioned with thousands of troops on the ground in Kurdistan, followed by 12 years of bombing raids. In 1999, Natos air campaign in Kosovo, also without UN authorisation, triggered a massive increase in the ethnic cleansing it was meant to halt. In Libya, in 2011, Natos intervention ratcheted up the death toll by a factor of about 10 and gave cover for rampant ethnic cleansing and indiscriminate killing. Its legacy today is complete state breakdown and civil war. It might be said that the latest US bombing campaign in Iraq has greater legitimacy because the Iraqi government appealed for support. But it did so back in June, after which Obama stayed his hand until the prime minister, Nouri al-Maliki, could be replaced with someone more acceptable to the US. At the same time, US arms are now being supplied directly to Kurdish forces, independently of the central government, fuelling the disintegration of the Iraqi state. And IS “ whose sectarian ideology is in reality only a more violent version of the Saudi regimes, the wests most important ally in the Arab world “ is consolidating its hold on western Iraq and eastern Syria, where it is in effect allied with the US and its friends. Its rise is a tragedy for both peoples. But another round of US and British military intervention would only strengthen IS and boost its credibility “ as well as increase the risk of terror attacks at home. The likelihood is that it can only be overcome by a functioning state in both Iraq and Syria. That in turn demands a decisive break with the sectarian and ethnic politics bequeathed by a decade of war and intervention. The urge to play the role of self-appointed global policeman retains its grip on the western world, but experience shows that will do nothing to rescue the people of Iraq. Far more important would be agreement between the regional powers, including Turkey and Iran, on a settlement to allow Iraq toÂ escape from its existential crisis. Selective humanitarian intervention without UN and regional authorisation is simply a tool of power politics, not solidarity. To imagine that the solution to the disastrous legacy of one intervention is to launch yet another is delusional folly. Twitter: @SeumasMilne"
"In 1941, Bertolt Brecht remarked to his diary that strategy has turned into surgery, an enemy country is ˜opened up after it has been anaesthetised, then it is swabbed down, disinfected, sewn up, etc all with the greatest of ease. That was the old style of war. These days, invasions are more like social work. Western nations today always fight in the name of humanitarianism, so that contemporary wars possess a distinctive vocabulary and grammar. For instance, each new humanitarian intervention must first distance itself from the previous one. In 2013, when John Kerry argued for military strikes in Syria, he presented his plan as a contrast to previous actions: the Syrian intervention, he said, would not resemble the Libyan intervention. He didnt mention that the Americans and their British allies had sold the Libya mission on an identical basis. For Libya, you see, was to be nothing like Iraq. But then, Iraq, too, was meant to be different. In 2003, George Bush, Tony Blair and John Howard all contrasted their war with the disasters of Vietnam. Now here we are again. Iraq in 2014 will be nothing like the 2003 intervention, says Tony Abbott. They are two very different situations, he explained. Whats happening now is a humanitarian involvement. Which, of course, was precisely what Blair argued “ and look how that worked out. The necessity of the not like last time trope stems from the almost universally disastrous record of recent humanitarian missions. Libya (remember that?) offers a particularly vivid example, since, back in 2011, the mission there was widely described, in David Owens words, as the prototype for a new kind of intervention.  So, after all that humanitarianism, hows Libya travelling? Just this week we learned that the Libyan authorities had lost control of most government buildings in Tripoli “ theyre now operated by rival Islamist gangs. Since the intervention, Libya has had had five or six governments (depending on how you count them). The conflict is no longer a civil war but is now being fought regionally, with parallels to other battles playing out in North Africa and the Middle East. In other words, the new model of intervention proved as catastrophic as the old brand. The necessity to distance each fresh conflict from the previous one means that liberals and ex-leftists play an important (perhaps even disproportionate) role in selling contemporary wars. Think back to 2003 and the extraordinary enthusiasm for the Iraq invasion by prominent progressives (Paul Berman, George Packer, Christopher Hitchens, Kanan Makiya) “ many of whom had cut their political teeth agitating against the Vietnam war. Rather than evading the Vietnam comparison, Bush and Blairs liberal enablers usually raised it: they, they said, understood more than anyone the follies of yesteryears wars “ and, on that basis, possessed a unique appreciation of how terrific the Iraq invasion would be. Yet, though humanitarian interventionists refer to the past, they always do so in a peculiarly cavalier way. The advocates of the 2014 mission mention 2003 but only to dismiss the comparison. They invoke history “ and then wave it aside. The new war is always a clean slate, entirely uncoupled from the prosaic details of historical (or even recent) events. How has the Islamic State been so successful so quickly? What relationship might the homicidal sectarianism in todays Iraq bear to the 2003 invasion or the subsequent surge? What about the wests attitude to the Assad dictatorship “ what role has that played? Such questions are irrelevant, since, for the west, each fresh mission resets the clock “ Year Zero commences as soon as the bombs start falling. Its not merely that history begins when we say so (and not a moment before). Its also that humanitarian interventionists present each crisis as a morality tale, an episode in a genre entirely outside historical time. We dont fight men, we fight monsters, creatures so evil that they oppose us on an almost ontological level.  [T]his new world faces a new threat, explained Blair, of disorder and chaos born of brutal states like Iraq, armed with weapons of mass destruction; or of extreme terrorist groups. Both hate our way of life, our freedom, our democracy¦ And heres Abbott on the supporters of the Islamic State: They hate us for who we are and where we live. They dont simply hate us for what we do. How could anyone hate us for what we do? Its not like we ginned up a murderous invasion on false pretexts, leaving hundreds of thousands dead and sending the nation spiralling into sectarian conflict. Oh, wait ¦     Local residents welcome Iraqi government forces as they arrive to deliver the humanitarian supplies. Photograph: Anadolu Agency/Getty Images     There have been lies; yes, but they were told in a good cause. We have been treacherous; but that was only in order that real good might come out of apparent evil.  Mark Twains words about an earlier overseas adventure apply with even more force to the Middle East. We might have done bad things “ but we meant well and so we graciously forgive ourselves. Our enemies, on the other hand, commit their atrocities out of pure malice. Where we have politics, they have pathologies. Besides, we cannot discuss the past, for the mission is urgent “ humanitarian interventions always are. No time! No time! The crisis has been brewing for years. But now it must be solved in an instant, with any hesitation fatal. The march to war back in 2003 took place against the tick, tick, tick of a stopwatch “ or, rather, a nuclear detonator, as Condoleeza Rice explained, the smoking gun might be a mushroom cloud. We couldnt tarry then and we cant tarry now, even as we confront the direct consequences of the previous rush to war. As Simon Maloy notes about the US neoconservatives: The disaster they helped create is so urgent, they claim, that we cant waste time arguing about why the disaster exists in the first place. But what about the Yazidis, the people were ostensibly coming to save? Again, were always coming to save someone “ and we always leave them worse off after were done. Remember when every pundit was an Afghan feminist? The rights of the women of Afghanistan will not be negotiable, explained secretary of state Colin Powell. When the light is fully shed throughout all of Afghanistan, the United States is committed to working to ensure not only that the women of Afghanistan regain their place in the sun, but they have a place in their future government as well. What happened to that? What about the Marsh Arabs, whom we championed against Saddam back in 2003? How are they faring? Or the people of Benghazi, over whom the worlds leaders exclaimed in 2011? Heard anyone talk of them lately, now that Libyas a permanent warzone? Our sympathy generally extends as far as the first week of bombing. Then, as our humanitarianism creates a new generation of refugees, the photogenic victim of yesterday becomes the grasping queue jumper whose boat we must stop. Besides, the ostensible earnestness of our interventions, the high morality we proclaim, goes hand-in-hand with an extraordinary light-mindedness about how these missions are actually supposed to work. Whats the harm of bombing them at least for a few weeks and seeing what happens? said the influential neocon Bill Kristol, a few days ago. Indeed, whats the harm of dumping 22m AK47 rifle rounds and 32,000 artillery shells into the midst of a civil war? What could possibly go wrong with that? The militarists of 1941 talked of surgery, while todays leaders speak only of peace. Nonetheless, when you look at Iraq since 2003, its hard not to do it in Brechts voice:   Their peace and their war Are like wind and storm. War grows from their peace. "
"Barely a month into the latest American bombing campaign in Iraq, and theyre already talking escalation. Last week Barack Obama promised that his plans to destroy the so-called Islamic State (Isis) would not involve American combat troops. This week General Dempsey, the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, said thats exactly what he would be recommending if air power didnt work. If work means destroy Isiss grip onÂ western Iraq and eastern Syria, it wont. So expect the new war that Chuck Hagel, the US defence secretary, says will last several years to ramp up in the months ahead. Yesterday Obama stuck to his formula. But there are already 1,600 US military advisers on the ground. Special forces will no doubt be back in serious numbers before long. The final cue was given by the repulsive video beheading of US and British journalists and aid workers by the sectarian fundamentalist group. Their Isis executioner declared that theÂ atrocities were in retaliation for 160-odd American air attacks since earlyÂ August, and Britains arming of their Kurdish opponents. Forget the sobering fact that the western-backed Saudi regime has beheaded dozens in public in recent months, including for sorcery, or that British troops infamously had themselves photographed with the severed heads of guerrillas during theÂ Malayan war in the 1950s. Such calculated acts of gruesome cyberterror softened up the US public for the renewed bout of western warmaking in the Middle East they haveÂ until now resisted “ which appearsÂ to have been exactly Isiss aim. Now the US president has bowed to relentless pressure to go back to war in Iraq “ the country he was elected to withdraw from. Of course, its supposedÂ to be different this time: surgical strikes and covert forces in support of Iraqi and Kurdish troops instead of invasion and occupation. But Isiss main base is in Syria, not Iraq. So Obama is also gearing up for an illegal bombing campaign in Syria and the training of an extra 5,000 moderate rebels “ who US officials privately concede dont really exist. Naturally, its all been nodded through by another coalition of the more-or-less willing to bypass the UN security council. So a year after the US and its allies planned to bomb Bashar al-Assads forces, theyre now planning to bomb his enemies. David Cameron is preparing to ratchet up Britains role in the campaign as soon as the Scottish referendum is out of the way “ with the Australians and French chafing to join up too. Theres even talk of setting up new UK military bases in Gulf states such as the UAE, Oman and Bahrain to bolster the war against Isis. What has been launched by the US and its allies this week is in effect their third Iraq war in a generation. It follows the US-led war to expel Iraqi forces from Kuwait in 1991 and the cataclysmicÂ US-British invasion and occupation of Iraq in 2003. Now Obama has launched yet another intervention to rid the country of the direct consequences of the last one. It doesnt take a strategic mastermind to grasp that it is energy wealth that has made Iraq the object of such unparalleled military force. But the results havent been disastrous in termsÂ of carnage and destruction only. Even in its own terms, western warmaking has failed. Bush and Blairs invasion demonstrated the limits, rather than the extent, of US power. Obamas war on Isis looks more like the Afghanistan war launched in 2001, supposedly to destroy al-Qaida and the Taliban. The result spread al-Qaida across the region and turned the Taliban into a guerrilla army of resistance. Thirteen years later, the Taliban controls large parts of Afghanistan and most Nato troops are on their way out. Al-Qaida has been eclipsed by the even more extreme Isis, which mushroomed out of the western-sponsored destruction of the Iraqi and Syrian states. Something similar is happening in the chaos bequeathed by Nato intervention in Libya three years ago. Were now witnessing a replay of theÂ war on terror, more than a decade after it was demonstrated to fuel terrorism rather than fight it. Since 9/11Â the US has launched 94,000 air strikes: most against Iraq and Afghanistan, but also Libya, Pakistan, Yemen and Somalia, killing hundreds ofÂ thousands of civilians in the process. Obama refers approvingly to the drone and special-forces campaigns in Yemen and Somalia as a model for his new war in Iraq. But they havent just killed large numbers of civilians. They have been a recruiting machine for al-Qaida and al-Shabab, and fanned civil war. And thats whats happening in Iraq, where US-backed attacks by government forces this month killed 31 civilians, including 24 children, in aÂ school near Tikrit. Right now Isis is a threat to Iraqis and Syrians and offers them no viable future. But as Obama has conceded, a group thats more interested in controlling territory as a fantasy caliphate than al-Qaida-style global jihad poses no direct threat to the US, or Britain for that matter. As a result ofÂ renewed intervention, however, itÂ could become one. The crisis in the Arab world doesnt just reflect the Shia-Sunni schism inflamed by the Iraq occupation, but the continuing western-backed rule of dictators in both the Gulf and north Africa, from Egypt to Saudi Arabia. Last years bloody US-indulged coup against Egypts elected Islamist president has paved the way for Isis-style violence. The alternative to Obamas new Middle East war is concerted pressure for UN-backed agreement between the main regional powers, including Turkey, Iran and Saudi Arabia, to wind down theÂ Syria conflict and back a genuine unity government in Iraq. An end to western support for the EgyptianÂ dictatorship would also help. Bombing will not destroy Isis, but win it sympathy “ or even cause it to mutate into something worse. Only Iraqis and Syrians can defeat Isis. But the US remains determined to keep control of the Middle East, while being unable to find a stable way of doing it. So its response to every failure of intervention is more intervention. The US and its allies are at the heart of the problem in the Middle East, not the solution."
"Tony Abbott was asked this week to state Australias mission in Iraq. His answer: our mission is to work for the betterment of mankind.  Betterment is a new addition to Australian military doctrine, very different to the military missions statements I was trained to craft. Its a noble sentiment, but hard to measure, and makes for inscrutable policy and loose strategy. It is clear however, that in conjunction with the United States and other allies the government intends to do something about the growing Isis threat in Syria and Northern Iraq.  It is also clear that Australias process of going to war is somewhat flawed. By instinctively reaching to deploy military combat forces, Australia may be overlooking other more prudent strategies and failing to learn from the conflicts of the past decade. Over the past three weeks the government “ and the opposition too, it should be noted “ have escalated their rhetoric on the threat posed by Isis. The prime minister has described Isis variously as a death cult, a hideous movement, and pure evil. Yesterday, when queried about the latest Isis hostage execution video, the prime ministers rhetoric hit fever pitch, describing them as abominable, unspeakable, repellent, abhorrent.  To be sure, Isis are a murderous band of fighters, but they can be targeted like any other enemy. Hyped, comic book descriptions of their villainy only serve to breath oxygen into Isiss propaganda operations. The overblown rhetoric informs the political case being made that Australia must intervene to protect Iraqi civilians from imminent genocide and ethnic cleansing. But there is a disconnect between the picture of an urgent humanitarian crisis that the major political parties (and former elected officials like Gareth Evans) are painting, and the paucity of Australian efforts thus far.  If the humanitarian crisis in northern Iraq is the greatest moral challenge of this parliaments time, then why has Australias total response to date been two planeloads of dry biscuits and weaponry for the Kurdish peshmerga? The reality is that Australias political rhetoric on this crisis has advanced well beyond the front line of our capabilities, or intentions to date.  The pressing question now, is what Australia should do next when Barack Obama determines whether the US should seek to crush, or merely contain Isis. The prime ministers position is that Australia should demonstrate its utility as an ally by offering military assets to the United States early and enthusiastically. Judging by background briefings his office has given to journalists, this should be in the form of combat strike capabilities, like special forces and the RAAFs F-18 Super Hornet aircraft. Of course, special forces deployments come with the convoluted caveat that theyre not boots on the ground.  There are three views in the parliament on this. There are enthusiastic supporters, found amongst the MPs lining up to repeat the governments sparse talking points on Iraq. There are slightly less enthusiastic supporters, found amongst the opposition who, lacking foreign policy expertise on their front bench, are cautiously endorsing the governments approach. And finally the Greens are re-raising their objections to the 2003 Iraq war. I dont support the Greens war powers bill. It frames conflict in terms more suited to 1914 than 2014, failing to appreciate that the line between war and peace has blurred and that the cadence of conflict has quickened. If passed, the bill would dangerously tie the hands of the government. I also disagree with those this week who, rather undemocratically, have argued that the parliament should not make decisions about the use of military force. One of the lessons learned from the past decades experience in the Middle East is that it is critical to forge domestic political consensus before the going gets tough in sustained military campaigns. I watched from Afghanistan as public support for the war evaporated, and as the last parliament struggled to frame a relevant debate after nine years of deployments.  Its true that, conventionally, the Australian parliament has not authorised the use of military force. It is also true that our allies in the United Kingdom and the United States have seen fit to better incorporate their parliaments in war decision-making. Allowing retrospective majority endorsement of lengthy military action is one way to do this. For example, the parliament might need to authorise a military campaign expected to last more than three months within 30 days of forces being deployed. This would allow the government to rapidly deploy military force to meet a crisis, but still allow parliament to fully consider why such force was necessary.  Parliaments have been debating going to war for hundreds of years, it I unclear why ours is so much more reticent to do so than our allies. A parliamentary vote would help build political consensus, would require every MP and Senator to have an accountable position on risking Australian lives in conflict, and might lead parliament to actively consider a wider range of strategies. So what other strategies should be considered? Assuming our objectives are to disrupt Isiss momentum, help maintain global good order, and maintain the strength of the United States alliance, there are a few alternative strategies we might consider. The first is to do nothing at all. Thats the strategy that the Netherlands, a Nato ally with a similar sized military to Australias, is pursuing.  We could do nothing until the United States announces its planned strategy, then decide on our response. We could even, quite legitimately, decide to do nothing in support of this intervention, after having spent much of the past two decades contributing forces in the Middle East. This would not wreck Anzus or destroy our international reputation. There are reportedly 81 countries with citizens fighting for Isis, many of whom have more direct national interests in Iraq and Syria, and none of the regional security responsibilities Australia has closer to home. Alternatively, as the US shifts attention and resources to the Ukraine and Middle East, Australia could take on a night watchman type role in Asia: offering to monitor and lead any necessary response to ongoing hotspots, such as Thailand. If government is committed to involvement in the Iraq/Syria crisis, we could adopt a range of differing national strategies, not all of which are military led. Australia might take the role of lead interlocutor with Iran and Syria, with the advantage of carrying less diplomatic baggage than the US. We could simply send humanitarian aid funding and focus on diplomatic efforts in the UN Security Council. Such was our strategy in March when Australia committed $111m in aid and co-authored UNSCR 2139 on humanitarian access to Syria, as the body count there topped 130,000.  If we seek a more active role still, Australia could use its cyber-security forces to offensively pursue and shut down the propaganda, social media, and email communications that Isis relies on to command its troops and muster its supporters. We could contribute treasury and tax officials to investigate and cut off ISILs finances, using our expertise and clout in financial services. Few of these other strategies have been considered. Instead, Australia seems to be reflexively defaulting to the strategies of the last decade: incremental tactical contributions of combat assets, problematic promises to avoid conflict and combat deaths, and vague political articulations of what we are doing and why. Though we have been sending our military to the Middle East for the last two decades, its clear we still have much to learn about formulating national security strategy."
"Dwell too much on the threat of Isis and you could go insane. The reports of whats going on in Syria and Iraq are ghastly enough. But speculative reports, like the one saying that Isis is infinitely closer to building a nuclear weapon than it was a year ago, or the one warning that the UK should restrict sales of chlorine for fear of a chemical attack in Britain, have huge capacity to spread fear and paranoia, which you cant help feeling is part of the point. Meanwhile, being a wise parent to a teenager can be hard at the best of times. But Muslim parents are constantly reminded that they must take in their stride the possibility that their children are being radicalised. Britains most senior Muslim police officer, Mak Chishty, warns that young people who stop drinking and stop socialising with friends could be in the process of becoming radicalised. One sees that theres common sense there.    'What helps radicalisation more than anything is the accusation that the west practises self-serving hypocrisy'    But one also knows that Stop drinking and socialising and start revising is also typical advice from parents to children. Chishty also says that stopping shopping at Marks &amp; Spencer could be a sign of radicalisation, because jihadis like to argue that the company is owned by Jews. This is horrible, hurtful information. But, really, are there teenagers who shop at M&amp;S so much that a sudden failure to do so would be easily spotted? The trouble is that many of the symptoms of radicalisation could also be symptoms of something else. Imagine berating your child because of your worries about radicalisation, only to find that your child actually had an eating disorder, or crippling depression? Whats really woeful about this endless pressure on Muslim parents to accept the burden of fighting radicalisation is that theres so much more that our broader society could do, but doesnt. And thats a big problem, because if theres a single thing that helps radicalisation more than any other its the accusation that the west routinely practises self-serving hypocrisy. Its an easy charge to make and “ lets be honest for a change “ a hard one entirely to refute. Are we really in a position to tell Muslim parents that if their child starts believing that the west is hypocritical in its dealings with the Middle East, then this is clearly a sign that they have lost their moral bearings? Anyone who was appalled when flags were flown at half-mast because the King of Saudi Arabia had died knows that the answer is no.   Related: Why Islam doesnt need a reformation | Mehdi Hasan    The west could have transformed 9/11 into an opportunity to make an infinitely more positive and unilateral intervention in Afghanistan, of infrastructural investment, support and partnership. Instead it moved on to Iraq, where denials that this conflict assisted in the growth of Isis are so absurd that not even the most culpable of Anglo-American hawks tries to make them. And this is very much the tip of the iceberg. Yet our politicians make no effort to build an honest narrative that acknowledges catastrophic error. On the contrary, any attempts to start such a debate are seen as party political. God knows Ed Miliband was no titan among statesmen. But at least he saw that Iraq was something that politics should be addressing. Its the British government that needs to start talking to Muslim teens and addressing matters that even the least likely to be radicalised can see as folly. That would help Muslim parents more than anything else possibly could."
"They want him to meet Barack Obama. Ed Miliband's advisers are apparently desperate for the Labour leader to have an official meeting at the White House. They believe people will think he's more prime ministerial if they see photos of him with the most powerful man in the world.Perhaps they've forgotten that Miliband's former boss didn't look all that like a prime minister at a UN summit in 2009. Gordon Brown was already in the job when his aides begged for a meeting with Obama and were, after five refusals, granted a ""walk and talk"" in a kitchen.Miliband's aides must be hoping David Axelrod can help. Axelrod, who was taken on in April, helped get Obama to power and coined the slogan, ""Yes, we can"". It's a shame he didn't seem, from a tweet, to know how to spell Miliband's name, but that doesn't mean he can't get him a meeting. It also doesn't mean he can. Obama wasn't pleased when Miliband changed his mind over military action on Syria. This has apparently left ""bruises"" in the White House that might take a while to fade.If Miliband's aides can't get him a meeting, they'll have to come up with something else. It isn't great that 60% of those questioned in a YouGov poll last month thought the Labour leader was ""not up to the job"" of prime minister. Or that 59% thought he was ""weak"" and 52% ""out of touch"" with their concerns. It's true Labour is still ahead in the polls, but in a YouGov survey on Friday its lead was cut to three points. Ten months before an election, this isn't great.The answer, according to some of his aides, is to present Miliband as ""Mr Normal"". He ""has to be authentic"", a ""senior Labour source"" told a newspaper at the weekend. ""There's no point trying to pretend he's something he's not. Ed is a family man who loves spending time at home with his wife and kids.""He's right that it's normal for people to like their children. It isn't quite so normal to have a property portfolio of Â£4.5m and a reported annual household income of about Â£340,000. It might be normal for the fortysomething former special advisers who now seem to run the country, but if you're going to slag off ""millionaires in the cabinet"" it's probably a good idea not to be one yourself. It certainly isn't normal to go on and on about a ""cost of living crisis"" and then not know the cost of your weekly shop.And when Miliband tried to eat a bacon sandwich during the run-up to the European elections in May, it looked as though he'd been told this is what ""normal"" people do, but that he'd be much happier with a nice brioche.It's lovely to be ""authentic"", of course, but exactly which Miliband is? Is it the one who ""took on"" Rupert Murdoch or the one who posed, at the start of the World Cup, with a front page of The Sun? That one looked as though he was in a hostage video made by Somali pirates and was trying to pretend his kidnappers were treating him well.These things wouldn't matter so much if we knew what Miliband wanted to do. The trouble is, we don't. Is he for public sector pay rises or against them? Will he carry on funding free schools? If he doesn't like cuts, which ones would he scrap? If he hasn't ruled out a referendum on Europe, when might he rule one in? Sure, he took a bold stance on Syria, but what about the rest of his foreign policy? If you're going to meet world leaders, you surely ought to have made this a bit clearer in at least one speech?It's all very well to stand up to the energy companies, but a promise of a price fix doesn't amount to a vision for change. Many of us think the government could be doing a damn sight better on education, youth employment and building industries for the future. But saying you'll have a ""one nation"" approach isn't the same as showing how you'll actually make that nation better.Nearly four years after he became Labour leader, the main thing people know about Miliband is still that he wrecked his brother's dreams. If he hadn't, according to that June YouGov poll, the party would be in line for an easy win. But he did and it isn't. It certainly isn't the usual definition of a ""family man"". Perhaps if Obama does get to meet him, he might ask him why.@queenchristina_"
"It wont be me, I hear you say. And, of course, I accept you are not a criminal, after all. The worst you do online is post stupid comments when you are drunk and masturbate to porn when you think no one is watching. When the government says it wants to take away the passports of wannabe jihadis, why should you care? I dont. Islamic State marks the bloody end of Britains version of identity politics. With more British Muslims fighting for Isis than serving in the British army, the least we can do is make amends to a bleeding world by stopping radical Islamists leaving to murder, enslave and rape. In any case, you and I are not going to Syria, are we? I doubt the states ban on hate preachers visiting universities will alarm you either. Students and college administrators have banned just about everyone with controversial opinions. The London School of Economics and the University of West London have even harassed and barred secularists, who wanted to expose the theocrats proselytising against women, Jews and gays on campuses. Some of us warned the universities that if they did not defend freedom of speech the state would remove their freedom. They didnt listen and now it has gone. Serves the fools right. I suspect that Theresa Mays order that internet and mobile phone companies must allow the police to identify who was using a device and when will probably fail to stir you too. Essential clues for 21st-century crime fighters, you could say. Better to help the police catch dangerous men than let them escape justice. I am not so sure. I am not worried by what the Home Office is doing but by what it wants to do. Nick Clegg has lost count of the number of times he has had to intervene to stop the security establishment crushing basic liberties. The Liberal Democrats blocked the police and intelligence services having access to the web histories of you, me and everyone else. They stopped them inserting black boxes to intercept web traffic. Most importantly to my mind, they blocked Mays astonishingly illiberal extremism prevention orders, which would have allowed the state to censor opinion rather than prevent crime by banning speakers who are not inciting violence or breaking the law. Despite these victories, you should feel uneasy. The Liberal Democrats could be gone within six months. The Tories may have a majority, or Labour may be in power, instead. As the record of the last Labour government suggests that Yvette Cooper will make Theresa May look like the leader of the Brownie pack, the odds are that all the authoritarian measures Clegg and his colleagues blocked will return. The Home Office never forgets a bad idea; never gives up. After Clegg blocked extremism prevention orders, the governments extremism task force met. Lib Dem ministers noticed that officials had put the orders right back on the forthcoming business agenda. One way or another, it wants police surveillance of everyones web and mobile records and the banning of unpleasant opinions. If that doesnt bother you, then you are a fool too. Friends who helped break the Snowden revelations are close to despair. The British, who survived the First and Second World Wars, the cold war and IRA bombs appear willing to tear up their civil liberties because of Islamist murderers. The electorate greeted the Guardians exposÃ© of mass surveillance with indifference. Neither Labour nor the Tories feels public pressure to reform the secret state. The standard reply to the publics belief that if youve nothing to hide youve nothing to fear is to ask: So you dont draw your curtains then? It is good as far as it goes, but a better warning against unconstrained police surveillance comes from our experience online. Malice and mobbish rage drive the Twitter storms that break more often than the autumn rains. A leftwing cookery writer uses David Camerons dead son to attack the prime minister. But instead of noting that we have all said vile things in our time, conservatives scream that she is a lesbian and campaign for Sainsburys to stop employing her as a celebrity chef. Myleene Klass humiliates Ed Miliband on television. Instead of trying to beat a D-list celeb in argument “ and if you cant do that you should give up on arguing “ leftists demand that Littlewoods stop using her as a model and selling her range of designer dresses. The same people who scream censorship and persecution when one of their own is targeted lead the slobbering pack when the chance comes to censor and persecute their enemies. They want them fined, punished and sacked, and never pause for a moment to consider their dizzying double standards or reflect that the weapons they use against others will one day be turned on them. Nearly every adult and many a bullied and mocked schoolchild has already changed their behaviour for fear of online spies, and not only because of the venom on Twitter. Employers examine Facebook pages before they hire staff. A politically incorrect post can lead to your sacking or demotion. Online anonymity always strikes me as cowardice until I reflect that millions of people are so frightened of capricious employers they dare not speak freely under their own name. Give it the chance and the authoritarian political class will ape the authoritarian managerial elite and be just as malicious as the Twitter heresy hunters. The Dorset council that used surveillance powers designed to catch gangsters to spy on a mother who was trying to get her child into a decent school is a symbol of our times. However outrageous and ham-fisted its behaviour was, the authorities could say that parents are breaking the rules if they game the school system. The police will make the same argument once they have the freedom to roam the web. They will say they have a duty to collect evidence of any crime, however minor. They will do it because they can. The most telling omission from the governments push towards a surveillance state is the absence of safeguards. The Lib Dems have forced it to establish the Independent Privacy and Civil Liberties Board to act as a counterweight to the overwhelming authoritarian advice coming from the Home Office. But that will go when the Lib Dems leave power and then, well, you will need a childlike trust in our leaders to sustain you. It wont be me, I hear you say. But if you tweet anonymously, or cower before online bullies, or watch what you write for fear of your employers, you must know that it already is. ¢ Comments will be switched on later this morning"
"It isn't like the movies. The returning hero shown in the video is pale, thin, clutching at a plastic bag. He is trying to cover a twitching eye. The bag is removed as he is patted down before being escorted into the helicopter. Indeed, Bowe Bergdahl, held by the Taliban for five years, may in the eyes of some fellow soliders be a deserter who needs further punishment. Parts of the American media are rabid with this demand.Bergdahl is being held in Germany, considered not well enough, physically or mentally, to be taken back to his family. A video the Taliban made of him in captivity, seen by the US government and not made public, is said to have prompted the prisoner exchange. The swapping of five GuantÃ¡namo prisoners in return for one American is also being hotly contested. That GuantÃ¡namo is still open is a stain on Obama's presidency but he powerfully defended this exchange. The American way is to bring home their own. ""Period. Full stop."" There is honour in this.Bergdahl's parents “ especially his father, with his bushy beard, his learning of Pashtu, his understanding of the geopolitics of where his son was fighting “ do not look like the standard US military family. Bowe also learned Pashtu. One of the reasons that Bin Laden could operate so well in the late 90s was because there were no CIA operatives who spoke the local language.The Bergdahls live, actually and psychologically, in places that most British people fly over. They are free-thinking Idaho Calvinists who home-schooled their children and talk about ethics and philosophy. Alongside this is a strong survivalist streak: by five, Bowe could shoot a rifle and ride horses. His need for adventure led him at 20 to Paris to learn French in order to join the French Foreign Legion. He was devastated when they refused him. By 2008, the fantasy was to go to Africa to teach self-defence techniques to those brutalised by local militia. He spoke of ""taking out warlords in Darfur and Sudan"".Unsurprisingly, this didn't happen either and he ended up in the army, and in Afghanistan. At first, he convinced himself this would be a great humanitarian enterprise. Soon, according to his father, he saw that ""we were given a fictitious picture ¦ of what we were doing in Afghanistan"". He saw innocent children casually run over by soldiers. Either he consciously deserted or he was not in a fit state to see the danger he was putting not only himself in, but also those who were sent to look for him.Much of what we know about him comes from the extraordinary work of Michael Hastings, a journalist who exposed an out-of-control military in Afganistan. Hastings became convinced he was being watched; aged 33, he drove his speeding car into a tree. Theories as to what caused that crash abound.Those who now want to try Bergdahl seem to be in utter denial about the mental state of those who have been at war. When soldiers come home, many are armed and dangerous. America knows this better than we do. I will never forget sitting in a late-night diner in the States in the 80s when a guy walked in with a sleeve gun. He said he had been in Vietnam, he didn't want to beg and he didn't want to hurt anyone. He wept and put the gun on a table. Everyone gave what they could.Soldiers now coming back from Afghanistan, like those returning from Vietnam, are coming back from an unpopular war. Three-quarters of Americans support pulling out the troops. What have these ""heroes"" achieved?Those who are anti-war tend not to care for these walking wounded. The left can be callous. The military concentrates recruitment where there are no jobs or chances of further education. In the US, it waives criminal records. Bergdahl's background should have raised alarm bells, as should Chelsea Manning's troubled past. Instead Manning found herself even more bullied and ostracised and put in an impossible situation.Bergdahl and Manning dissented. Others who have served remain in the combat zone. They continue to kill: often their wives, children or themselves, and this is hushed up. From the invasion of Afghanistan up to 2008, in the US there were 150 cases of fatal domestic or fatal child abuse by ""new veterans"". Last year, Panorama revealed that more British soldiers had killed themselves in 2012 than had died at the hands of the Taliban in the same period.How easy is it to be clear about what is heroic and what is traitorous when the mission is on ever-shifting sands? We were in Afghanistan to stop poppy production, free women, defeat the Taliban, root out al-Qaida. Our generals always said we would have to talk to the Taliban, as we did. Jihad is an ever-movable feast of death, as we have seen in Syria. The game of war that Bergdahl played, his desire to be the good guy in a bad place, was delusional. But all of it is delusional: the slaughter of innocents that we are to accept as somehow worthwhile. ""Mission accomplished"" is the euphemism for this godawful mess.War comes home now raw, skeletal, damaged. Such is the denial about what has been done that Bergdahl must be welcomed with yellow ribbons or denounced totally as evil personified. He wrote that ""the horror that is America is disgusting"". Whether he was sane or insane when he wrote this will now be battled over. But whatever happens, Bergdahl was a prisoner of war. And like so many he will always remain one."
"Last year a wealthy couple called Regina and Christopher Catrambone were cruising the Mediterranean when they saw a jacket float past their yacht. The captain said the owner was probably dead, one of thousands of desperate people who drown each year as they seek a decent life in Europe. Soon after their holiday, inspired by this glimpse of tragedy and Pope Franciss appeal to help migrants, the pair spent Â£3m on a rescue ship for refugees. This inspiring couple from Malta are modern-day Good Samaritans. Their 40-metre vessel is equipped with a sick bay, drones to spot migrants adrift in theÂ sea, and fast boats to pluck them from the waters. On its first trip two months ago, the ship picked up 227 migrants crammed on to a floundering fishing boat “ just a few of those thousands of human beings fleeing carnage in Syria, chaos in Iraq, civil warÂ in Libya, conflict in Nigeria and cruel repression in the horn of Africa. Another 300 were saved on Monday. Contrast this compelling display ofÂ Christian values with the shameful position of our government. In responseÂ to the greatest refugee crisis in more than half a century, a foreign office minister toldÂ the House of Lords that Britain would not support European search andÂ rescue missions in the Mediterranean sea. The little-known Lady Anelay justified this act of despicable inhumanity on the entirely spurious grounds that such missions might end up encouraging migrants to make a dangerous sea crossing. Her argument was skewered this morning on BBC Radio 4s Today programme by Daniel Habtey, an Eritrean pastor who fled Africas most repressive country after churches were closed and he was put in a prison camp. These were the hostile actions that drove him to flee his nation with his wife and infant child; together, they spent 15 days crossing the Sahara desert before joining nearly 80 others on that perilous Mediterranean crossing. Similar horrors lie behind the stories of many of the 400 migrants pulled from the waters each day, or the more than 2,500 known to have drowned there so far this year. Many more deaths go unrecorded. Forget talk of benefits tourism. I have heard similar tales of desperationÂ and despair from migrants locked up in Greek jails, stuck in Jordanian refugee camps, and waiting for a boat in LibyanÂ seaside towns “ as well as from those who have made it to this land that once took such pride in its status as a refuge for those fleeing conflict and repression. And we must not ignore that Britain was militarily involved inÂ collapsed countries such as Iraq andÂ Libya, while idiotic aid policies foster conflict and repression in swaths ofÂ sub-Saharan Africa. Yet such is the toxic nature of theÂ immigration debate poisoning the political discourse in Britain that a minister happily announces the nationsÂ refusal to back a mission designed to save thousands of human lives. No doubt the concept of European Union patrols made the idea all the less palatable amid the political games of Westminster. But this is abject andÂ cynical politics, placing domestic electoral battles over the decency andÂ principles our national leaders purport to espouse. Yet do not be surprised, for this is what happens when mainstream politicians fail to confront the myths and misinformation of misanthropes. This is the hideous consequence of mainstream parties spooked by Ukip joining a bidding war to be most hostile to migrants instead of challenging the prejudices of a party playing on peoplesÂ insecurities. This is the result of crass talk of communities being swamped (along with the rise in racism and religious bigotry identified by Justin Welby, the Archbishop of Canterbury.) This is the legacy of lionising and ennobling a narrow-minded immigration obsessive. This is the tragic inevitability of a politics fuelled by fear and pessimism. There is a terrible irony in how recentÂ British governments have madeÂ such play of being forces for goodÂ in the world, whether through military interventions against despotismÂ or maintaining those aid budgets, but the same politicians treatÂ human beings fleeing in search ofÂ tolerable lives like flotsam and jetsamÂ to be discarded in the seas. For all the impassioned talk on Syria, the latest figures show less than 100 of that shattered nations most vulnerable refugees have been allowed to reach these shores under a scheme announced to help them seven months ago. Germany, by contrast, is taking in 20,000 Syrians. Britain must resolve whether it wants to remain an open and optimistic force inÂ the world or curl up like a defensive hedgehog, showing only prickles to theÂ rest of the planet. Is it too much to hope a nation still admired for its decency could be jolted to its senses by the dark immorality of aÂ decision that places party politics above the deaths of desperate people?"
"The anti-Muslim drumbeat has become deafening across the western world. As images of atrocities by the jihadi terror group Isis multiply online, and a steady trickle of young Europeans and North Americans head to Syria and Iraq to join them, Muslim communities are under siege. Last week David Cameron accused British Muslims of quietly condoning the ideology that drives Isis sectarian brutality, normalising hatred of British values, and blaming the authorities for the radicalisation of those who go to fight for it. It was too much for Sayeeda Warsi, the former Conservative party chair, who condemned the prime ministers misguided emphasis on Muslim community complicity. He risked further alienating the large majority of Muslims fighting the influence of such groups, she warned. Even Charles Farr, the hawkish counter-terrorism mandarin at the Home Office, balked. Perhaps fewer than 100 Britons were currently fighting with Isis, he said, and we risk labelling Muslim communities as somehow intrinsically extremist.   Related: Remember, prime minister: British Muslims hate Isis too | Sayeeda Warsi    But Cameron and his neoconservative allies are preparing the ground for the governments next onslaught. The target will not be terrorism, but non-violent extremism. Next month, from nursery schools to optometrists, health services to universities, all will be legally obliged to monitor students and patients for any sign of extremism or radicalisation. The new powers represent a level of embedded security surveillance in public life unprecedented in peacetime. We already know from the governments Prevent programme the chilling impact of such mass spying on schools, where Muslim pupils have been reported for speaking out in favour of Palestinian rights or against the role of British troops in Afghanistan. But the counter-extremism bill announced in the Queens Speech is about to take the anti-Muslim clampdown a whole stage further. The plans include banning orders for non-violent individuals and organisations whose politics are considered unacceptable; physical restriction orders for non-violent individuals deemed harmful; powers to close mosques; and vetting controls on broadcasters accused of airing extremist material. Its censorship under any other name. That was the view of Sajid Javid, then culture secretary, in a leaked letter to the prime minister earlier this year. But Cameron shows every sign of pressing ahead with what amounts to a full-blown assault on basic liberties. Most ludicrously, the new powers are defended in the name of British values, including individual liberty and mutual respect and tolerance. But as became clear in the aftermath of the murderous Paris attack on Charlie Hebdo earlier this year, we are not all Charlie when it comes to freedom of speech. Anti-extremism powers will be used overwhelmingly against Muslims, rather than, say, non-Muslim homophobes and racists who have little interest in mutual respect and tolerance.    Add in media hostility, Islamophobia and state surveillance of Muslim communities, and alienation can only spread    And they will fail, as their earlier incarnations have done, to discourage the small minority drawn to terrorism at home or jihadi campaigns abroad. Government ministers claim such violence is driven by ideology rather than injustice, grievance or its own policies. But, given that they refuse to speak to any significant Muslim organisation they dont agree with or fund, perhaps its not surprising to find them in thrall to an ideology, neoconservatism, of their own. Any other explanation for the terror threat would in any case implicate the government and its predecessors. In reality, it shouldnt be so hard to understand why a small section of young alienated Muslims are attracted to fight in Syria and Iraq with Isis and other such groups. Jihadi ideology has been around for a long time. But there were no terror attacks in Britain before US and British forces invaded Afghanistan and Iraq, and those behind every violent attack or terror plot have cited western intervention in the Muslim world as their motivation. Isis has a different appeal to al-Qaida. It has taken huge stretches of territory using naked terror, destroyed borders and set up a self-proclaimed caliphate. In the Middle East it presents itself as the defender of Sunnis in a convulsive sectarian war. For a few young marginalised western Muslims, such groups can offer the illusion of a fight against tyranny and a powerful sense of identity. But add in relentless media hostility, rampant Islamophobia, state surveillance and harassment of Muslim communities, and such alienation can only spread. In the past year, weve had the Trojan Horse Birmingham schools plot that never was, the ousting of an elected Muslim mayor of Tower Hamlets by a judge “ including on grounds that he had exercised undue spiritual influence on Muslims “ and evidence of an increasing level of anti-Muslim attacks.  Islamophobia now far outstrips hostility to any other religion or ethnic group. Ministers and their media allies downplay the role of foreign policy in Muslim radicalisation, against all the evidence. By foreign policy, they mean multiple western invasions and occupations of Muslim states, torture and state kidnapping on a global scale, and support for dictatorships across the Arab and Muslim world. That includes Saudi Arabia, of course, which shares much of Isiss ideology and practices; and Egypt, whose ex-military leader, Abdel Fatah al-Sisi, overthrew the elected president in 2013 and is soon to be welcomed to Downing Street. Isis is itself the direct product of the US and British occupation and destruction of Iraq, and both countries back armed rebel groups fighting in Syria “ as they did in Libya. So no wonder would-be jihadis get confused about who is on whose side. Western Isis volunteers are a disaster for Syria and Iraq, but so far they havent carried out return attacks at home. That could of course change, not least as the government criminalises dissent, brands conservative religiosity extremist and, in the formulation of ministers, quietly condones Islamophobia. The British government has long fed terrorism with its warmaking abroad. Now its also fuelling it with its scapegoating of Muslims at home."
"The anti-Muslim drumbeat has become deafening across the western world. As images of atrocities by the jihadi terror group Isis multiply online, and a steady trickle of young Europeans and North Americans head to Syria and Iraq to join them, Muslim communities are under siege. Last week David Cameron accused British Muslims of quietly condoning the ideology that drives Isis sectarian brutality, normalising hatred of British values, and blaming the authorities for the radicalisation of those who go to fight for it. It was too much for Sayeeda Warsi, the former Conservative party chair, who condemned the prime ministers misguided emphasis on Muslim community complicity. He risked further alienating the large majority of Muslims fighting the influence of such groups, she warned. Even Charles Farr, the hawkish counter-terrorism mandarin at the Home Office, balked. Perhaps fewer than 100 Britons were currently fighting with Isis, he said, and we risk labelling Muslim communities as somehow intrinsically extremist.   Related: Remember, prime minister: British Muslims hate Isis too | Sayeeda Warsi    But Cameron and his neoconservative allies are preparing the ground for the governments next onslaught. The target will not be terrorism, but non-violent extremism. Next month, from nursery schools to optometrists, health services to universities, all will be legally obliged to monitor students and patients for any sign of extremism or radicalisation. The new powers represent a level of embedded security surveillance in public life unprecedented in peacetime. We already know from the governments Prevent programme the chilling impact of such mass spying on schools, where Muslim pupils have been reported for speaking out in favour of Palestinian rights or against the role of British troops in Afghanistan. But the counter-extremism bill announced in the Queens Speech is about to take the anti-Muslim clampdown a whole stage further. The plans include banning orders for non-violent individuals and organisations whose politics are considered unacceptable; physical restriction orders for non-violent individuals deemed harmful; powers to close mosques; and vetting controls on broadcasters accused of airing extremist material. Its censorship under any other name. That was the view of Sajid Javid, then culture secretary, in a leaked letter to the prime minister earlier this year. But Cameron shows every sign of pressing ahead with what amounts to a full-blown assault on basic liberties. Most ludicrously, the new powers are defended in the name of British values, including individual liberty and mutual respect and tolerance. But as became clear in the aftermath of the murderous Paris attack on Charlie Hebdo earlier this year, we are not all Charlie when it comes to freedom of speech. Anti-extremism powers will be used overwhelmingly against Muslims, rather than, say, non-Muslim homophobes and racists who have little interest in mutual respect and tolerance.    Add in media hostility, Islamophobia and state surveillance of Muslim communities, and alienation can only spread    And they will fail, as their earlier incarnations have done, to discourage the small minority drawn to terrorism at home or jihadi campaigns abroad. Government ministers claim such violence is driven by ideology rather than injustice, grievance or its own policies. But, given that they refuse to speak to any significant Muslim organisation they dont agree with or fund, perhaps its not surprising to find them in thrall to an ideology, neoconservatism, of their own. Any other explanation for the terror threat would in any case implicate the government and its predecessors. In reality, it shouldnt be so hard to understand why a small section of young alienated Muslims are attracted to fight in Syria and Iraq with Isis and other such groups. Jihadi ideology has been around for a long time. But there were no terror attacks in Britain before US and British forces invaded Afghanistan and Iraq, and those behind every violent attack or terror plot have cited western intervention in the Muslim world as their motivation. Isis has a different appeal to al-Qaida. It has taken huge stretches of territory using naked terror, destroyed borders and set up a self-proclaimed caliphate. In the Middle East it presents itself as the defender of Sunnis in a convulsive sectarian war. For a few young marginalised western Muslims, such groups can offer the illusion of a fight against tyranny and a powerful sense of identity. But add in relentless media hostility, rampant Islamophobia, state surveillance and harassment of Muslim communities, and such alienation can only spread. In the past year, weve had the Trojan Horse Birmingham schools plot that never was, the ousting of an elected Muslim mayor of Tower Hamlets by a judge “ including on grounds that he had exercised undue spiritual influence on Muslims “ and evidence of an increasing level of anti-Muslim attacks.  Islamophobia now far outstrips hostility to any other religion or ethnic group. Ministers and their media allies downplay the role of foreign policy in Muslim radicalisation, against all the evidence. By foreign policy, they mean multiple western invasions and occupations of Muslim states, torture and state kidnapping on a global scale, and support for dictatorships across the Arab and Muslim world. That includes Saudi Arabia, of course, which shares much of Isiss ideology and practices; and Egypt, whose ex-military leader, Abdel Fatah al-Sisi, overthrew the elected president in 2013 and is soon to be welcomed to Downing Street. Isis is itself the direct product of the US and British occupation and destruction of Iraq, and both countries back armed rebel groups fighting in Syria “ as they did in Libya. So no wonder would-be jihadis get confused about who is on whose side. Western Isis volunteers are a disaster for Syria and Iraq, but so far they havent carried out return attacks at home. That could of course change, not least as the government criminalises dissent, brands conservative religiosity extremist and, in the formulation of ministers, quietly condones Islamophobia. The British government has long fed terrorism with its warmaking abroad. Now its also fuelling it with its scapegoating of Muslims at home."
"The anti-Muslim drumbeat has become deafening across the western world. As images of atrocities by the jihadi terror group Isis multiply online, and a steady trickle of young Europeans and North Americans head to Syria and Iraq to join them, Muslim communities are under siege. Last week David Cameron accused British Muslims of quietly condoning the ideology that drives Isis sectarian brutality, normalising hatred of British values, and blaming the authorities for the radicalisation of those who go to fight for it. It was too much for Sayeeda Warsi, the former Conservative party chair, who condemned the prime ministers misguided emphasis on Muslim community complicity. He risked further alienating the large majority of Muslims fighting the influence of such groups, she warned. Even Charles Farr, the hawkish counter-terrorism mandarin at the Home Office, balked. Perhaps fewer than 100 Britons were currently fighting with Isis, he said, and we risk labelling Muslim communities as somehow intrinsically extremist.   Related: Remember, prime minister: British Muslims hate Isis too | Sayeeda Warsi    But Cameron and his neoconservative allies are preparing the ground for the governments next onslaught. The target will not be terrorism, but non-violent extremism. Next month, from nursery schools to optometrists, health services to universities, all will be legally obliged to monitor students and patients for any sign of extremism or radicalisation. The new powers represent a level of embedded security surveillance in public life unprecedented in peacetime. We already know from the governments Prevent programme the chilling impact of such mass spying on schools, where Muslim pupils have been reported for speaking out in favour of Palestinian rights or against the role of British troops in Afghanistan. But the counter-extremism bill announced in the Queens Speech is about to take the anti-Muslim clampdown a whole stage further. The plans include banning orders for non-violent individuals and organisations whose politics are considered unacceptable; physical restriction orders for non-violent individuals deemed harmful; powers to close mosques; and vetting controls on broadcasters accused of airing extremist material. Its censorship under any other name. That was the view of Sajid Javid, then culture secretary, in a leaked letter to the prime minister earlier this year. But Cameron shows every sign of pressing ahead with what amounts to a full-blown assault on basic liberties. Most ludicrously, the new powers are defended in the name of British values, including individual liberty and mutual respect and tolerance. But as became clear in the aftermath of the murderous Paris attack on Charlie Hebdo earlier this year, we are not all Charlie when it comes to freedom of speech. Anti-extremism powers will be used overwhelmingly against Muslims, rather than, say, non-Muslim homophobes and racists who have little interest in mutual respect and tolerance.    Add in media hostility, Islamophobia and state surveillance of Muslim communities, and alienation can only spread    And they will fail, as their earlier incarnations have done, to discourage the small minority drawn to terrorism at home or jihadi campaigns abroad. Government ministers claim such violence is driven by ideology rather than injustice, grievance or its own policies. But, given that they refuse to speak to any significant Muslim organisation they dont agree with or fund, perhaps its not surprising to find them in thrall to an ideology, neoconservatism, of their own. Any other explanation for the terror threat would in any case implicate the government and its predecessors. In reality, it shouldnt be so hard to understand why a small section of young alienated Muslims are attracted to fight in Syria and Iraq with Isis and other such groups. Jihadi ideology has been around for a long time. But there were no terror attacks in Britain before US and British forces invaded Afghanistan and Iraq, and those behind every violent attack or terror plot have cited western intervention in the Muslim world as their motivation. Isis has a different appeal to al-Qaida. It has taken huge stretches of territory using naked terror, destroyed borders and set up a self-proclaimed caliphate. In the Middle East it presents itself as the defender of Sunnis in a convulsive sectarian war. For a few young marginalised western Muslims, such groups can offer the illusion of a fight against tyranny and a powerful sense of identity. But add in relentless media hostility, rampant Islamophobia, state surveillance and harassment of Muslim communities, and such alienation can only spread. In the past year, weve had the Trojan Horse Birmingham schools plot that never was, the ousting of an elected Muslim mayor of Tower Hamlets by a judge “ including on grounds that he had exercised undue spiritual influence on Muslims “ and evidence of an increasing level of anti-Muslim attacks.  Islamophobia now far outstrips hostility to any other religion or ethnic group. Ministers and their media allies downplay the role of foreign policy in Muslim radicalisation, against all the evidence. By foreign policy, they mean multiple western invasions and occupations of Muslim states, torture and state kidnapping on a global scale, and support for dictatorships across the Arab and Muslim world. That includes Saudi Arabia, of course, which shares much of Isiss ideology and practices; and Egypt, whose ex-military leader, Abdel Fatah al-Sisi, overthrew the elected president in 2013 and is soon to be welcomed to Downing Street. Isis is itself the direct product of the US and British occupation and destruction of Iraq, and both countries back armed rebel groups fighting in Syria “ as they did in Libya. So no wonder would-be jihadis get confused about who is on whose side. Western Isis volunteers are a disaster for Syria and Iraq, but so far they havent carried out return attacks at home. That could of course change, not least as the government criminalises dissent, brands conservative religiosity extremist and, in the formulation of ministers, quietly condones Islamophobia. The British government has long fed terrorism with its warmaking abroad. Now its also fuelling it with its scapegoating of Muslims at home."
"The anti-Muslim drumbeat has become deafening across the western world. As images of atrocities by the jihadi terror group Isis multiply online, and a steady trickle of young Europeans and North Americans head to Syria and Iraq to join them, Muslim communities are under siege. Last week David Cameron accused British Muslims of quietly condoning the ideology that drives Isis sectarian brutality, normalising hatred of British values, and blaming the authorities for the radicalisation of those who go to fight for it. It was too much for Sayeeda Warsi, the former Conservative party chair, who condemned the prime ministers misguided emphasis on Muslim community complicity. He risked further alienating the large majority of Muslims fighting the influence of such groups, she warned. Even Charles Farr, the hawkish counter-terrorism mandarin at the Home Office, balked. Perhaps fewer than 100 Britons were currently fighting with Isis, he said, and we risk labelling Muslim communities as somehow intrinsically extremist.   Related: Remember, prime minister: British Muslims hate Isis too | Sayeeda Warsi    But Cameron and his neoconservative allies are preparing the ground for the governments next onslaught. The target will not be terrorism, but non-violent extremism. Next month, from nursery schools to optometrists, health services to universities, all will be legally obliged to monitor students and patients for any sign of extremism or radicalisation. The new powers represent a level of embedded security surveillance in public life unprecedented in peacetime. We already know from the governments Prevent programme the chilling impact of such mass spying on schools, where Muslim pupils have been reported for speaking out in favour of Palestinian rights or against the role of British troops in Afghanistan. But the counter-extremism bill announced in the Queens Speech is about to take the anti-Muslim clampdown a whole stage further. The plans include banning orders for non-violent individuals and organisations whose politics are considered unacceptable; physical restriction orders for non-violent individuals deemed harmful; powers to close mosques; and vetting controls on broadcasters accused of airing extremist material. Its censorship under any other name. That was the view of Sajid Javid, then culture secretary, in a leaked letter to the prime minister earlier this year. But Cameron shows every sign of pressing ahead with what amounts to a full-blown assault on basic liberties. Most ludicrously, the new powers are defended in the name of British values, including individual liberty and mutual respect and tolerance. But as became clear in the aftermath of the murderous Paris attack on Charlie Hebdo earlier this year, we are not all Charlie when it comes to freedom of speech. Anti-extremism powers will be used overwhelmingly against Muslims, rather than, say, non-Muslim homophobes and racists who have little interest in mutual respect and tolerance.    Add in media hostility, Islamophobia and state surveillance of Muslim communities, and alienation can only spread    And they will fail, as their earlier incarnations have done, to discourage the small minority drawn to terrorism at home or jihadi campaigns abroad. Government ministers claim such violence is driven by ideology rather than injustice, grievance or its own policies. But, given that they refuse to speak to any significant Muslim organisation they dont agree with or fund, perhaps its not surprising to find them in thrall to an ideology, neoconservatism, of their own. Any other explanation for the terror threat would in any case implicate the government and its predecessors. In reality, it shouldnt be so hard to understand why a small section of young alienated Muslims are attracted to fight in Syria and Iraq with Isis and other such groups. Jihadi ideology has been around for a long time. But there were no terror attacks in Britain before US and British forces invaded Afghanistan and Iraq, and those behind every violent attack or terror plot have cited western intervention in the Muslim world as their motivation. Isis has a different appeal to al-Qaida. It has taken huge stretches of territory using naked terror, destroyed borders and set up a self-proclaimed caliphate. In the Middle East it presents itself as the defender of Sunnis in a convulsive sectarian war. For a few young marginalised western Muslims, such groups can offer the illusion of a fight against tyranny and a powerful sense of identity. But add in relentless media hostility, rampant Islamophobia, state surveillance and harassment of Muslim communities, and such alienation can only spread. In the past year, weve had the Trojan Horse Birmingham schools plot that never was, the ousting of an elected Muslim mayor of Tower Hamlets by a judge “ including on grounds that he had exercised undue spiritual influence on Muslims “ and evidence of an increasing level of anti-Muslim attacks.  Islamophobia now far outstrips hostility to any other religion or ethnic group. Ministers and their media allies downplay the role of foreign policy in Muslim radicalisation, against all the evidence. By foreign policy, they mean multiple western invasions and occupations of Muslim states, torture and state kidnapping on a global scale, and support for dictatorships across the Arab and Muslim world. That includes Saudi Arabia, of course, which shares much of Isiss ideology and practices; and Egypt, whose ex-military leader, Abdel Fatah al-Sisi, overthrew the elected president in 2013 and is soon to be welcomed to Downing Street. Isis is itself the direct product of the US and British occupation and destruction of Iraq, and both countries back armed rebel groups fighting in Syria “ as they did in Libya. So no wonder would-be jihadis get confused about who is on whose side. Western Isis volunteers are a disaster for Syria and Iraq, but so far they havent carried out return attacks at home. That could of course change, not least as the government criminalises dissent, brands conservative religiosity extremist and, in the formulation of ministers, quietly condones Islamophobia. The British government has long fed terrorism with its warmaking abroad. Now its also fuelling it with its scapegoating of Muslims at home."
"When I arrive in Jay Hunts glass-walled office on Channel 4s commissioning floor, I get an immediate sense of how her dizzying rise has played out: it seems as if she moves at twice the speed of anyone else. Ive never met anyone who speaks so fast, or who moves so constantly, shifting on the sofa or hands waving in front of her. Shes good company, but its a bit exhausting. You can see why, as Channel 4s chief creative officer, she might be a bit hyperactive. According to a leaked letter last week, the Home Office would like to turn its attention to televisions capacity to spread evil, and I dont mean the unpardonable incubation of Katie Hopkinss career. According to the letter, the home secretary, under counter-extremism measures, planned to introduce powers to scrutinise programmes before they are broadcast, with the ability to take pre-emptive action against them. But how would it work? Would Theresa May have to sit through Hollyoaks? And what would the consequences be? I would be concerned that [it] is restricting our freedom of speech, without a shadow of a doubt, says Hunt. It isnt clear what became of Mays plans “ in the Queens speech this week, it was vaguely said that Ofcoms powers would be strengthened “ but how should broadcasters respond? One of the things that is powerful in this country is the strength of our journalism, and I hope that people would stand up and be counted on an issue like that, says Hunt. On a practical level, we want to defend our right to be able to broadcast difficult journalism within the law.   Related: Channel 4 News launches 4NewsWall using animated GIFs    It is almost impossible, she says, to conceive of a way in which it could work, particularly in a daily news environment. Ofcom, in that post-transmission regulation role, is an incredibly effective organisation. Former culture secretary Sajid Javid warned that Ofcom would take the role of censor. Hunt remembers working during the years when the voices of Sinn Fein leaders, along with other republican and loyalist representatives, were banned to deprive them of the oxygen of publicity. I think anyone who lived through that, from a news perspective, would question whether that did anything towards achieving the ends it was set up to achieve, she says. The censorship proposals may not be the only threat her channel faces from this government. Last year it was reported that the Conservatives had drawn up plans to sell Channel 4, which could be valued at around Â£1bn, but Vince Cable, the then business secretary, stopped it. Without the Liberal Democrat influence, is Channel 4 vulnerable? I think its really early days. Weve got a new government. The channel itself is in a good place, Im very pleased with where we are creatively, and I hope, night in, night out, were making our case for why this unique ecology and way of working delivers something that is culturally important to the UK. Were it privatised, it would be a fundamentally different channel and I say that, speaking from the coalface, about the decisions that I make every single day. You dont commission Cucumber [Russell T Daviess drama about older gay men] or Grayson Perry talking about identity, or current affairs about children living on the frontline in Syria if youve got shareholders demanding you hit a particular profit mark. I make decisions, knowingly, that are overtly non-commercial ... Im incredibly proud of where we are creatively. She knows, she says, having worked at Channel 5, that the expectations of what a channel like that is there to do are fundamentally different. Has that freedom made it a good spell for Channel 4? Creatively speaking, theres little doubt its in good shape. The channel won six Baftas this month, more than any other, for programmes including the documentary The Paedophile Hunter and The Island with Bear Grylls, and last year it was named channel of the year at the Edinburgh TV awards for the first time since Hunt took over. Its show have regularly set the agenda for the national conversation.   Related: Jay Hunt: 'People take potshots at you and you have to become quite sanguine'    In ratings terms, though, the news is less good. Many of its recent dramas, even the much-hyped ones such as Cucumber, Danny Boyles Babylon and the second series of Utopia, fell flat (one TV industry watcher I spoke to said that its drama department was fucked), and the audience share figure of 5.6% is disappointing “ lower even than in 2013, when Hunts bonus was halved because of the disappointing figures. Hunt shrugs it off. I think what were always looking at, on the basis that terrestrial channels are in slow, long-term decline, [is] whether we are stabilising and whether we are continuing to do what we were set up to do. When she joined Channel 4 in late 2010, coming from her previous job as controller of BBC1 (her hits there included Sherlock and Mrs Browns Boys), she inherited a channel struggling, like most others, with the advertising downturn that had hit the number of shows in development, and the off-loading of Big Brother, which meant that there were an extra 200 hours to fill. Taking on Channel 4 was a complete reinvention job, effectively. She is excited by shows such as Gogglebox, in which people are filmed watching television, and is rightly proud of the channels coverage of the Paralympics. This sounds incredibly naive for a relatively old lady, she says “ Hunt is a far-from-ancient 48 “ but I still get up in the morning every day thinking television can change the world. Hunt describes herself as an outsider, given that she was born in Australia and only moved to the UK, where her father became a professor at the London Business School, as a teenager; though after that she was educated privately in London and went to Cambridge, which sounds about as insidery as you can get in TV. But she was attracted to journalism, she says, because she always loved stories. In London after university, she got a job on a six-week contract as a researcher, which turned into a 20-year career. In 1999, she became editor of the Six OClock News. She remembers a story about spying and suggested to her team that they could present it like a cartoon with speech bubbles. I look back now and think I was desperately trying to get out of that straitjacket. She moved to work on the daytime offering, becoming controller there in 2005. At the time people thought Id had a lobotomy “ I was running the biggest news programme in the country, and the next thing, I was doing Call My Bluff, makeover shows and looking after Weakest Link. And it was fantastic “ incredibly freeing and a really exciting place to learn. In 2007, she was poached to become director of programmes at Five, but returned to the BBC just months later when she was offered the top job at BBC1.     Jay Hunt (right) taking part in a Family Fortunes quiz at the Edinburgh International Television Festival in 2011. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian    She is, from what Ive read and the people Ive spoken to, a divisive figure. To be fair, I cant see why “ she is charming and engaging, and seems, from the couple of exchanges I witness with members of her staff, extremely down-to-earth. But there are stories of producers complaining that shes a meddling micromanager, and one incredible tale of the departing head of comedy, Shane Allen, who gave out End the Hunt T-shirts at his leaving do. John Ware, a senior Panorama reporter (who, Hunt pointed out, shed never actually met) once complained she was as shallow as a paddling pool; more damaging was the Countryfile presenter Miriam OReillys charge that Hunt hated women at the age discrimination tribunal she brought against the BBC (which she won). There doesnt seem to be a nice way of asking this: Hunt doesnt, I suggest, seem to be very well-liked. She laughs, though theres a brittleness to it. I dont think thats necessarily true. Ive been running channels for 10 years and in a job like mine you say ˜no far more often than you say ˜yes, and people take that with varying degrees of grace. She gestures to the people at desks beyond the glass walls of her office and says many of them have worked with her for years, so I think I command quite a lot of loyalty as well, but the inevitable consequence of doing these jobs for a long time is that there will be people who dislike you, and you have to be quite sanguine about that, because in most instances, its not personal. Does she think she is judged more harshly because shes a woman? It is inevitably the case that you are more obvious as a senior woman, she says. So why are there still not many women at the top of television? I think they are demanding jobs and a lot of women dont want to be in the public eye for exactly [those] reasons. A lot of women take a decision that they cant reconcile it with the other demands in their life. I totally respect that. Im from a two-working-parent household, and that presents its own challenges. Hunt, who has two children with the former TV presenter Ian Blandford (who now runs a training company), says she has an array of working-parent horror stories. One I remember very clearly was when I was making packed lunches for both of them. I sent one to school with crackers, and the other to school with cheese. Just examples of the wheels coming off when youre working.   Related: Channels 4 and 5 giving Tories more airtime than other broadcasters    Having usually been in the office since 8am (she is up at 6am, and goes to the gym before work), Hunt says she tries to lead by example by leaving the office on time. Theres not a prize for sitting here until 9pm; there is a prize for doing great work, she says. One of my observations about employing working mums is that they are ruthless about time management in a really good way. Theyre incredibly good employees, and also good parents, because they carve out the time to do that. But another reason she thinks womens careers stall at a certain level is because many have much less confidence than their male peers. I mentor quite a lot of women now, and one of the things I talk about is being prepared to put themselves out there, and I totally understand, given some of the issues Ive had, why women are reluctant to do that ¦ it makes me sad that it isnt the sort of industry women think they can forge a big and successful career in, and I hope in some small way the fact that Im still here shows you can. I was going to ask her where she thinks her confidence comes from (a profile on Hunt for Radio 4 said she applied for the job of deputy editor of Newsnight despite being young and inexperienced, though when I ask her about it she says its not true). But still, her self-assurance does, regrettably, seem a bit unusual. Well then, youve fallen for it, because Im not a very confident person. I feel things acutely. When I get things wrong, Im very aware of it. I find the criticism extremely tough, of course I do. I think youd be inhuman if you didnt feel like that. What she does have instead, she says, is a resilience that comes from thinking I want to do this job, and what we do matters to me and I need to keep going. Thats different from confidence. If you cant be confident, you can pretend to be confident, and frankly, in business, that can go quite a long way. How far can Jay Hunt go? Would she like to be the BBCs first female director general? I havent finished what Im doing here, and I hope Ill be at Channel 4 for a long time, she says. But is it at least on her radar? She laughs. Its not on my radar, I love being here. Its something about the appetite for being bold and risk-taking, which is very Channel 4, and feels very me, too.  This article was amended on 1 June 2015. It originally named the departing head of comedy as Steve Allen. His first name is Shane. This has been corrected. "
"Are you still waiting for Chilcot? I dont mean in the literal sense, obviously. Six years on, waiting for John Chilcot and his distinguished panel to say something “ anything, really “ about the war in Iraq has become a constant of Westminster life. Two elections have come and gone; one by one, key players are retiring from political and army life, and still nothing. The boiling frustration of grieving military families, who yesterday threatened to sue if he doesnt deliver soon, is entirely understandable.   Related: Chilcot inquiry “ what you need to know    But almost nobody is waiting for Chilcot now to make up their mind. Twelve years after the invasion, whichever camp youve chosen “ BlairÂ the bloodsoaked war criminal, BlairÂ the tame poodle, Blair the honourably mistaken but hopelessly overconfident, or even (niche, but it happens) Blair the saviour of the Iraqi people “ your views are doubtless pretty settled. Public opinion calcifies; its hardÂ to keep an open mind forever. Even if Chilcot has, against absolutely all expectations at Westminster, found the smoking gun that eluded everyone else, then millions now wouldnt even believe in it. Whomever it exonerated or damned, the internet would merely heave with conspiracy theories about why it surfaced now. Theres a grim irony to the fact that those accusing Blair of choosing facts to fit his conclusion are often guilty of the same. But the Chilcot non-report still has something to teach us “ possibly more, indeed, than the appearance of the damn thing ever will. And as an almost impossibly wide-ranging public inquiryÂ into historic child sex abuse, which could easily drag on six years or longer, gets under way its timely to consider those lessons. Nobody hearing yesterdays RadioÂ 4 interview with Reg Keys, whose son Tom was killed in action in 2003, could doubt that the inquiry has failed to give grieving relatives what they want. Many families understandably want to know whether their children died in a just war or in an illegal one “ and if the latter, to see someone punished; but there isÂ noÂ guarantee that Chilcot will definitively answer that question, let alone grant Keys wish to see Blair dragged before aÂ court. The striking thing, however, is that Keys seemed almost wearily resigned to that. Asked what would bring him closure and help him begin to move on, his answer was for the wounds of grief not to be constantly reopened by public debate; he just wanted to be able to consign Iraq to history. And suddenly, you were reminded of the way forensic teams painstakingly comb the rubble of bombsites for any scrap of human remains, in recognition of the powerful human need for something to bury. The soldiers families have held funerals, but what Keys seemed to be expressing was a desire to put Iraq in the ground, too; to contain it, if not to forget. While some of the delay has been beyond Chilcots control “ the death of a panel member, the tortuous negotiations over publishing notes of some Blair-Bush meetings “ the prolonging of the agony for the families feels horribly cruel nonetheless. But if what we have come to expect ofÂ Chilcot is essentially some kind of truth and reconciliation process “ to help the bereaved come to terms with loss, and the rest of us understand exactly what was done in our name and why “ that was not the job he was actually given. The Chilcot inquiry has arguably failed its remit, but its remit was probably not the one you think. Its official purpose as set out by Gordon Brown to parliament was to establish lessons learned in Iraq to strengthen the health of our democracy, our diplomacy and our military; in other words, to avoid repeating mistakes in future conflicts. It was supposed to take only a year, at least partly because such lessons must be reasonably contemporary to be useful. Since weve intervened in Libya and are on the brink of doing so in Syria with the benefit of precisely zero insights from Chilcot, even on these limited grounds it has hardly been a success. But there was an unofficial purpose to it too, which was more nakedly political. The inquiry was always seen as a way of Brown differentiating himself from Blair, showing willingness to clean out the stables where Iraq remained an issue; but it was at least partly also responding to the very public distress of those who had lost loved ones in action.One wonders how much of that nuance got across in the ten minutes Sir John said he was given to decide whether to take the job. Now what were left with is an inquiryÂ falling unhappily between two stools; reporting neither early enough to be useful (unlike, say, the Mid Staffordshire hospital scandal inquiry) nor late enough to take the long view of history, as the equally interminable Bloody Sunday report did.    What we have come to expect of Chilcot is essentially some kind of truth and reconciliation process    The risk, meanwhile, is that the system can only grow more unwieldy. An explosion in trackable data “ emails, texts, communications that would once have been verbal and perishable but now must all be traced “ suggests future inquiries will be if anything more time-consuming. Public faith in the establishment uncovering the truth meanwhile is fading, while the never-ending nature of these sagas means good potential chairs shy away. The longer Chilcot drags on, the more reluctant governments become to establish future inquiries. So why not establish a fiercely independent standing office of investigators whose sole job is to analyse and learn from the states mistakes? A squad to be assigned whenever something big goes wrong, roping in specific expertise as required, bringing everything learned in the last inquiry to bear on the next. (After all, the same themes “ poor communication, poor management “ pepper every report.) It could include not just elderly judges but behavioural scientists too, capable of understanding why humansÂ make mistakes and what drivesÂ bad judgments, alongside dataÂ scientists good at sifting vast quantities ofÂ information. And where whats really needed is to reconcile victims to traumatic events, or apportion blame, then we should have the courage to separate that clearly from the time-limited learning process “ instead of heaping everything into one vehicle that inevitably then grinds to a halt. The old joke that we now need an inquiry into the Chilcot inquiry is not, asÂ it turns out, that funny at all."
"Moise Adihou stands by a rough wooden bench beneath a mango tree, surrounded by a small crowd that has gathered to hear his story.""We were in the field,"" he says. ""Abraham came to visit after school to tell us he came first in his class. We were happy, so we wanted to celebrate.""Adihou is a neat, sombre man in his 50s, and what he is describing took place in the village of Gaohungagon in the Zou department of Benin, West Africa. Abraham was 13 and Adihou's eldest child.""My wife went to the mill to grind some maize but the mill broke down. So she asked to borrow some flour and came home and cooked maize porridge for the family. When we ate it, Abraham fell down crying in pain. Then my wife doubled over and I felt cramps in my stomach. I&nbsp;was conscious it might be the flour and my brother said, 'Let's give it to the dog.' So we did, and the dog began to vomit. We managed to get to the hospital. After three days I regained consciousness and they told me my son was better. Only when I&nbsp;came&nbsp;home&nbsp;did I learn that Abraham had died.""Celestine was pregnant and took longer to recover. She stands in silence as her husband talks, visibly frustrated with the baby she carries on her back, whom she taps with a&nbsp;twig to stop her crying.""We can't blame the family who lent us the flour because they became sick, too,"" she says. ""I&nbsp;blame myself because I cooked the maize¦ We&nbsp;still think of him.""Abraham Adihou was poisoned by a cotton pesticide mistakenly sprayed on maize in the village store room. Such tragedies are not uncommon. Cotton is the world's most important non-food crop. It is also highly susceptible to pests such as cotton bollworm, and more pesticides are used on it per unit than on any other crop. They are used liberally in some of the poorest countries in the world, where farmers lack basic safety equipment such as gloves and glasses, as well as training. Health problems linked to pesticides include birth defects and the acute poisoning that can result from accidental ingestion. It's common for contamination to occur where there's no separate storage space and families live and work in cramped conditions. In 1990, the World Health Organisation estimated 1m poisonings annually and 20,000 deaths from pesticide poisoning.˜We still think of him: since Moise and Celestine Adihous 13-year-old son Abraham died of pesticide poisoning, they have become champions of organic farming. Photograph: Andrew Esiebo for the GuardianIn Benin, one 2001 study discovered 65 deaths, including 10 children under 10, in two districts in just one season. Cotton in Benin is watered by rain, without irrigation. Farmers live in mud huts and cook on open fires with no electricity. In the north of the country cattle are used to pull ploughs. Elsewhere land is tilled by hand by the farmer, his wives (rural Beninese society is polygamous), children when they aren't at school, and hired labourers. Yet, as in other developing countries, since the 1970s, cotton has mainly been farmed here using agrochemicals including, in some cases, the banned insecticide endosulfan, to raise yields.Since the Rana Plaza factory collapse in Bangladesh last year, in which 1,130 people died, health and safety issues in the global garment industry have been under the spotlight. Reacting to pressure from NGOs, unions and politicians, some retailers are investing in improvements. But the farms from which high-street chains source their fabrics are only the first link in a supply chain that reaches across the world, and news of pesticide poisoning does not travel far.Benin is a long strip of a country to the west of Nigeria. Independent from France since 1960 and a democracy since 1991, it is less than half the size of the UK, with a population of 10 million people who mostly depend on agriculture. Travelling with a team from a local NGO, I am here to meet cotton growers and visit a project that teaches them to eliminate pesticides by farming organically.Setting out from the main coastal city, Cotonou, we drive for seven hours up the country's biggest road before arriving in the fertile farming region around Aklampa in the commune of GlazouÃ©. We are met at a turn-off by a farming agent on a motor scooter, and follow him in our four-wheel drive, bouncing up and down on the red-dust track as mopeds and the occasional car crammed full of people, with sacks of maize, yams and cassava tied to the roof, travel to market in the other direction.Over three days here and in the Zou region farther south, we talk to more than 100 mostly organic farmers, some in fields, others gathered in village centres. It is the winter dry season and the cotton harvest is under way. Everywhere we stop to speak to people working on the land “ their skin and heads uncovered in the fierce sun as they move down the rows, plucking the white cotton bolls from the twiggy plants “ we hear reports of the skin, eye and stomach irritation, headaches and dizzy spells linked to the use of chemicals without correct safety precautions.""The first thing is my health,"" says DieudonnÃ© Aifa, 50, whose 15-hectare farm near Loholohouedji, growing cotton, maize and cashews, was converted to organic farming eight years ago. ""When I grew conventional cotton, I&nbsp;suffered from different kinds of sicknesses. My body was warm all over and stomach problems stopped me eating. Now I&nbsp;work very hard but at least I don't get sick.""Aifa has to work far longer hours now because organic farming relies on farmers rotating their crops, which takes time, and monitoring insects.""The chemical approach is you go in, you spray, you kill everything,"" says Keith Tyrell of Pesticide Action Network. ""When you go organic you've got to use knowledge, be more hands-on. Farmers here are first taught what a pest is and which insects are their friends. Then they go around putting a stone in the left pocket for each pest they see, one in the right pocket for a beneficial insect. A lot of organic cotton fails because you can't just take away pesticides and hope the crops will be OK. They won't. You need intensive training.""Such techniques don't suit all farmers, especially those who lack land or labour. For crops to be certified organic, fields must be free of chemicals for three years during which farmers must put up with yields down by up to 50% without the benefit of the 20% premium paid for organic cotton. But with input costs reduced when they stop buying chemicals, in the areas where organic farming is successful, farmers' incomes have increased.Aifa says he makes more money now than before, ""that helped me pay to send my children to school and to build a house I can rent out. We're semi-autonomous, we've been trained in many things we can do without the agent. Instead of burning the fields, now we plough them.""At a public meeting in the newly opened local school, members of a women farmers' group echo his enthusiasm. Kintadje Azonsode, also 50, stands up to show off twin boys, Luc and Lucien. Told she was infertile, she attributes her recent pregnancy to the switch to organic farming.In Gaohungagon, where Abraham Adihou died, local musicians give a performance. A display of the ingredients of the natural food spray they now use, to attract beneficial insects to their crops, has been arranged on the ground: neem seeds, palm cake, papaya leaves, chilli, garlic, cow urine. The lyrics describe how to make the spray by leaving the seeds to soak in water for three days, pounding the leaves and so on. After the singing, young women dance and the visitors eat peanuts and hot cassava. In a&nbsp;mainly illiterate population, this is how recipes are taught and remembered, but the song is also a&nbsp;celebration. ""To control pests you should keep them out manually and keep in the fields their natural enemies,"" chants frontman Robert Tangni. ""Organic cotton is wealth.""˜Organic cotton is wealth: in Gaohungagon, where Abraham Adihou died, local musicians sing to villagers about the benefits of natural farming methods. Photograph: Andrew Esiebo for the GuardianIt is 20 years since Beninese agronomist Professor Davo Simplice, now 62, carried out the first African study of farming practices that would reduce environmental damage. At the time, ""nobody here believed it was possible"". He formed the Beninese Organisation for the Promotion of Organic Agriculture (Obepab). Since then, Obepab has trained 13,267 organic farmers and now oversees production of around 1% of Beninese cotton, which is fairly traded under the French Ecocert system. Last year President Yayi Boni suggested Benin might in future move to an all-organic cotton sector “ the first country in the world to do so. For&nbsp;now, Simplice says his goal is 5% in 10 years.It is a slow process. In villages such as Gaohungagon where there have been fatal accidents, some farmers will willingly give up chemicals and try organic farming. But more often the first step is to reduce pesticide use, which many farmers are keen to try because this will save them money. As a small organisation, Obepab found itself ill-equipped to store and sell its cotton to the commodities trading companies. Last year the government stepped in and now buys the whole crop. Soil in the area where the Adihous live is poor and following catastrophic floods in 2010, some farmers returned to conventional methods in search of higher yields. But in the two other regions where the project is based, organic farmers are thriving and independent research shows that while their margins are not always higher than those of conventional farmers, their outgoings are lower.So how can we support projects like this one? Where can we buy the T-shirt? The answer is we can't, or not directly. When British recycling charity Traid agreed to fund Obepab with the profits from its 11 secondhand clothes shops, it sought a retail partner to buy the crop, who could then track it through the supply chain and sell it as organic cotton from Benin. But the search came up empty. While most big retailers have sustainability policies, these generally stop short of full transparency; the only ones who do this are ethical clothing specialists such as People Tree and Pants to Poverty.The industry acknowledges cotton production problems and over the past 10 years has launched several schemes. The biggest, Better Cotton Initiative, aims to reduce environmental impact, improve farmers' lives and produce 30% of all cotton by 2020. Meanwhile, following falling sales of its cotton, the Fairtrade Foundation last year gave up on traceability in favour of a new sourcing programme that is easier to implement. Between 2008 and 2011, the financial crisis, a tightening up of certification in India (where 70% of organic cotton is grown) and war in Syria meant that global organic cotton production fell back.The crop has yet to recover and problems with seed supply and cash flow persist (""The agricultural timetable simply doesn't fit well with the fashion seasons,"" says Liesl Truscott of Textile Exchange). Meanwhile organic clothes have disappeared from some British shops. Next, Tesco, Arcadia (owner of Topshop, BHS and Dorothy Perkins) and Primark have all stopped buying organic cotton, while Walmart/Asda, five years ago the biggest buyer, has reduced its organic stocks.Told she was infertile, Kintadjie Azonsode is now mother of twin boys Luc and Lucien, conceived, she believes, after she switched to organic farming. Photograph: Andrew Esiebo for the GuardianSo are consumers not interested? Retailers take different views. Of high-street chains, H&amp;M and C&amp;A share the most ambitious sustainability targets for cotton (though Dutch chain C&amp;A has no UK shops): 100% ""more sustainable"" by 2020 (M&amp;S's target is 50%). Both say research shows customers value organic clothes and want to buy them, but only if they cost the same as non-organic ones. Last year H&amp;M overtook C&amp;A to become the world's biggest buyer of organic cotton, with Puma and Inditex (Zara) also in the top 10.Among big retailers, C&amp;A has done the most work in digging down into its supply chain. ""Our industry is not the most transparent,"" says Philip Chamberlain, the company's British head of sustainable business. ""What we have learned is that it is possible to trace the raw materials in your supply chain back to the earliest stages.""Back in Benin, as we stop to buy fruit from hawkers and fill up the cars in market towns where illegal Nigerian petrol is on sale at the roadside, my eye is caught by the hairdressers' painted signs in every row of shacks, and groups of girls and women braiding each other's hair.How do the women farmers trained by Obepab use the extra income from their new fields “ called ""afternoon fields"" because they farm them after work on their husbands' land is done? Does their hard-earned cash go on hairstylists or clothes?""We like these things,"" says Albertine Adjalian. ""But the main thing is to send our children to school. The future is more important."""
"The days are long gone when Labour was torn apart by ban the bomb. For the party leader, Ed Miliband, the Trident missile is what HS2 is for David Cameron. It is political tokenism, machismo, image candy. Am I big on defence, Miliband said to an interviewer. Hell, yes. Look at my weapons. For Britain (and France), nuclear bombs are to foreign policy what Olympics are to proper sport: chauvinism bereft of intellectual justification or value for money. But what of weapons that actually hurt people? This week the United States was still refusing to lift economic sanctions on Cuba, even while admitting their failure for half a century to bring down the Castro regime. Indeed, the effect of sanctions is Cubas chief tourism appeal.   Related: Obama in historic talks with Castro but Cuban leader in no mood for a love-in    At the same time America and Britain are resisting Irans demand for sanctions to be lifted following the inspection of its nuclear plants this summer. In the case of Russia, pressure is on for sanctions to be tightened in response to Putins constant provocations along his western flank. They are the something that can always be done. Sanctions remain in place against North Korea, Burma, Zimbabwe, Syria, Libya, Somalia, Congo and other weak and vulnerable states, irrespective of whether they achieve any policy goal. They have become the default mode of western diplomacy, the acceptable face of aggression, a casual flick of contempt by the rich against the poor. Surveys of economic sanctions always equate hurting with working. Lots of things hurt, such as torture, but that doesnt make them work. The studies by the Chicago academic Robert Pape in the 1990s on the futility or counter-productivity of almost all the centurys 115 uses of sanctions have never been seriously challenged. Yet sanctions supporters persist in rosy-tinted language about their signalling, their pressure mixes and their changing the calculus of repression. They all assume dictators think like democrats. Sanctions can be briefly effective against democracies (against Britain during Suez), yet tend to make democracy less effective through isolation (as probably in Russia and Iran). The BBCs Bridget Kendall has just returned from a determined search for critics of Vladimir Putin across Russia. She can hardly conceal the fact that sanctions have bolstered support for the regime. They have entrenched a siege economy, silenced criticism of Putin and encouraged his chauvinist belligerence. They have also divided and weakened Europe. They are the most dangerously counter-productive policy imaginable, and all because something must be done about Ukraine.     ˜Bridget Kendall has just returned from a determined search for critics of Vladimir Putin across Russia. She can hardly conceal the fact that sanctions have bolstered support for the regime. Photograph: Maxim Zmeyev/Reuters    None of the countries targeted by sanctions threaten the safety or survival of Britain. All are based on the economic fallacy that money is what motivates power in a modern state. Attack the money, especially of a regimes cronies, and policy must change. Yet years of business articles about the Russian economy facing collapse (along with the Cuban, Iranian and Syrian ones) must make Putin laugh. So a babushka freezes and an oligarchs daughter cant shop at Harrods? Big deal. It is like Harold Wilson pledging that sanctions against Rhodesia would work in weeks not months. They lasted 14 years. Iran is a relative newcomer to the ranks of regimes stabilised by western sanctions. It has seen just 36 years of their not toppling clerics and not stopping them going nuclear. The current detente resulted from the election of a reformist leader, Hassan Rouhani, opposing the domestic chaos of his predecessor, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad. There is no doubt that sanctions hurt Iran and it would like them to end. But that does not make them effective. The west cannot conceivably conquer Iran or bomb it into submission. A military attack would merely speed an arms race and force the country back towards fundamentalism. Only the soft power of economic and cultural exchange might avert that danger. Neither the west nor the Iranian people have the remotest interest in sanctions continuing, and Rouhani needs every card he can play against his hardliners. Yet Washington and London still hold hard to sanctions. They have all the diplomatic subtlety of Game of Thrones.    The one coercion that dictatorships understand is an army firing guns. It worked against Serbia, the Taliban and Saddam    The one true coercion that dictatorships understand is an army firing guns. It worked against Serbia, against the Taliban, and against Saddam, just as the absence of an army has not worked against Syria or Islamic State. But such force is advisable only when that army is liable to win “ rarely the case against AK47s “ and when it is ready to occupy territory indefinitely. As for armadas of costly ships and planes, they are hangovers from 20th-century conflicts. Britains present defence (or rather attack) policy is where medicine was in the days of wart-charmers and bleeding. Sanctions have become as sacred to western armouries as nuclear bombs were 50 years ago. No one dares question them for fear of being thought a dove or a wimp. They cost little to the aggressor but make them feel good. They repress trade rivals. They attract macho adjectives, such as tough, meaningful, targeted and smart. They are chiefly aimed at domestic consumption. Only the poor (and a handful of rich) in the victim states suffer. Influencing policy in foreign countries short of war is a mugs game. It is realistic only where it takes the form of diplomatic, trade and cultural exchange, and strengthens the professional and merchant class from which brave criticism of authoritarian government tends to emerge. Yet sanctions suppress such groups and drive them into exile, as now in Russia and Iran. The idea that economic warfare would ever cause Iraqis to rise up against Saddam, or Libyans against Gaddafi, or Cubans against Castro, was always daft. The idea that it will turn Russia against Putin is beyond absurd. Yet such warfare remains British government policy. And in Labours manifesto, sanctions are no more questioned than nuclear weapons. Stupid still rules."
"The last texts of Kamran ul-Haque to his elder brother tell a story of a young man fearful yet thrilled by the prospect of war in Syria. I might be going on a mad mission very soon. Theres a place that has been heavily attacked and bombarded, he wrote. The 29-year-old east Londoner, who had been in the country since December last year, had spent months ferrying the dead and injured to field hospitals in the country “ in his own words, bloody, gruesome work far from his old life as an Indian takeaway delivery man in Whitechapel, east London. [They] need me here and my ambulance to take people out. Very risky mission but I love the feeling. Speaking to the Guardian, Bari, his elder brother, who has requested that the Guardian not reveal his true identity, reproached him repeatedly, saying it was time to come home “ telling him he had done his bit and had duties to his elderly widowed mother, wife and 17-month-old daughter. He replied: I have already done some mad missions. If we dont do it, then who will? Four weeks later, Kamran was killed, his older brother says, his body flattened under a building that collapsed after being struck in a barrage of Cruise missiles fired by the US at eight terrorist bases around Aleppo on the night of 22 September. The strikes were meant to decapitate the leadership of a hitherto largely unknown part of al-Qaida known as Khorasan, which the US claimed was planning attacks on the west. However, the raids apparently also claimed the lives of Kamran, two other east Londoners of Bangladeshi heritage, and a 19-year-old from Brighton, Ibrahim Kamara. Almost 24 hours after the attack, Bari was leaving a mosque in Stepney Green when he was taken aside by a member of the congregation and told his brother had been martyred. I broke down. I started crying and could not stop. A couple of guys picked me up and sat me down. I was told it was 100% certain. I do blame the Americans for his death. In the next month, Bari sought out anyone who could tell him what had happened. My mum kept asking for a picture. One guy told me: ˜Your brother is under rubble, and even if there was a picture, he wouldnt look good. Kamrans friends insisted that he and the other Bangladeshi boys had been freelancing, servicing different groups fighting president Bashar al-Assad in Syria. One western analyst, who has been in and out of Syria this summer, told the Guardian the young men were most likely jihadi volunteers hanging around camps “ hangers-on rather than true fighters. I imagine there could be a lot of those who have not sworn allegiance properly but are still tagging along with bigger groups. However, western jihadis in Syria, such as Amer Deghayes, claim that Kamran belonged to a group of British Bangladeshis who were simple fighters and, like the Brighton teenager Kamara, had joined Jabhat al-Nusra. The group is a Syrian affiliate of al-Qaida that has fought against both Assad and Islamic State (Isis) militants in the countrys civil war.     Kamran ul-Haque is said by his brother to have been killed in Syria by US missiles.    Bari, though, says otherwise. My brother was never a fighter. He never mentioned picking up a gun. If he did join al-Nusra, it would have been because of Islamic State, who were killing people who didnt pledge allegiance to them. You had to join a group to get protection. Bari says Kamran, who was the most religious of four brothers, had decided to become involved in Syria after watching YouTube videos showing women and children being slaughtered in late 2011. He joined one of the first convoys out of London delivering tents, food and clothing to Syrians fleeing the civil war in March 2012. Kamran had been stopped by police leaving Britain at Dover, but allowed to travel on when he explained he was on a humanitarian mission. After a fortnight in Syria in 2012, Bari says, he came back motivated and energised. As soon as he returned, however, the trouble began. First the police raided his family home taking phones and computers. Next, Kamran, who had thrown himself into charity work, was repeatedly thwarted in his attempts to return to Syria. Three times he travelled to the Turkish-Syrian border but was turned back. Kamran spent hours with police trying to sort out his paperwork to get back to the relief camps. My mum was getting wound up he wasnt getting a job. We told him to give up. Forget Syria you have done your bit,  said Bari. The turning point came last November, when Kamrans father died and most of the family went to Bangladesh to bury him and sort out his affairs. While they were away, Kamran got the all-clear from the police to travel and joined another aid convoy. By December 2013 he was in Syria. Bari says his brother called him in February. Kamran said he was learning to drive an ambulance. I kept telling him ˜come back. He just said he needed a few months more. But Bari says his brother became trapped in Syria after he lost his passport. In the summer I was telling him to come back because mums crying, your wifes angry, and thats when he told me he had lost his passport. If he came back, he said, he would face prison. He was trapped. Cage, a group that campaigns on behalf of terror suspects allegedly denied legal rights and which advised the Haque family, says ministers need to rethink their Syria strategy and take a more nuanced approach toward returnees. Amandla Thomas-Johnson, Cages spokesman, said: The government must provide a window of opportunity for Britons to return, because unfortunately, this isnt the first time weve heard of people trapped in the region wanting to come home. Bari, however, says that any change in policy will come too late. Ive lost a brother. He was a decent guy, not a troublemaker, even before he became religious. He would not pick up a gun to be an action hero."
"They say actions speak louder than words, and perhaps this universal truth is even more evident in the Middle East, where the sound of rocket fire and the explosion of bombs often drowns out the written word. We in Israel know all about that, having been at the receiving end of gun and missile fire for decades. In that time we have learned, the hard way, that it is only our actions that ensure our survival, not written promises. Our neighbourhood does not play by western rules, and as the only democracy in the region we know all too well what it is to fight an enemy that abuses our values. In our region, one regime stands out above all others in its destructive role. That same regime is attempting to camouflage its actions by employing diplomacy and by relying on the short memory of international public opinion. The ayatollahs in Tehran would have us believe that they are a peace-loving regime that seeks a tranquil, stable Middle East, and that the Vienna nuclear deal is proof of their benign intentions. But reality is telling us a different story, one that totally contradicts this narrative. If we are to understand the Iranian regime, we must look at what it is doing, not just saying, and ask ourselves whether its actions are compatible not just with western interests but, more important, with western values.   Related: Iran nuclear deal reached in Vienna    Iran is the worlds leading state-sponsor of terrorism, arming and supporting Hezbollah, Hamas, Palestinian Islamic Jihad, the Syrian regime (itself a leading state-sponsor of terrorism), and Houthi rebels in Yemen. It employs the IRGC (Irans Revolutionary Guards force) to perpetrate acts of terrorism throughout the world, from Asia to Europe to the United States. The regime also maintains terror cells in Africa and Latin America, where it has carried out deadly attacks. Interpol international arrest warrants “ known as red notices “ are currently issued against senior Iranian officials for their active role in planning the bombing of the Amia Jewish community centre in Buenos Aires, where 85 people lost their lives. Irans destructive regional role reflects its internal crimes as well: executions under the moderate president, Hassan Rouhani, are up to 700 this year alone, more individuals per capita than any other country in the world; gay people are persecuted (the offence of homosexuality carrying a death sentence), as are religious minorities. The UN has found that the human rights situation in Iran is worsening under the current regime, heavily criticising Iran for arresting journalists, lawyers and opposition politicians. The independent watchdog Freedom House rates Irans press and internet bluntly as not free. Tehrans military nuclear record is well documented: the regime has been working clandestinely for decades to develop a nuclear weapon, coming clean about its enrichment facilities only when these were discovered by opposition groups, and coming to the negotiating table only under the heavy pressure of comprehensive international sanctions. Even today, with the Vienna deal signed, the concerns of the International Atomic Energy Agency “ the international nuclear watchdog “ on the military dimensions of the Iranian nuclear project remain unanswered. Rouhani himself boasted of how in previous rounds of negotiations he took advantage of talks in European capitals to secretly advance the nuclear military project.    The ayatollahs would have us believe they are a peace-loving regime that seeks a tranquil, stable Middle East    Irans leaders tweet and write opinion pieces in the western press, while social media, including Twitter, YouTube and Facebook are banned in their own country, and bloggers and online activists face jail terms for expressing their ideas online. Therefore we should be wary of Irans words, and look to its actions instead: the terror attacks carried out in numerous countries, the funding of the murderous Assad regime, of Hezbollah, Hamas, Islamic Jihad, the mass executions, the persecution of gay people, of political activists, the censorship of free thought, and the track record of subterfuge on its nuclear military programme. Iran does not conform to the most basic of western values on any of these issues. The Vienna nuclear agreement addresses none of this, nor does it give Iran any incentive to change its behaviour. In a conversation I had a decade ago, while I was foreign minister, with one of the European heads of state, he raised a concern that tougher sanctions on Iran would raise the price of an oil barrel to more than $100. I responded by saying that we have to first take care of the living and then take care of the standard of living. The west must look beyond its economic interests, and ask itself what values it has in common with the ayatollahs in Tehran “ and it must not let itself become confused. Iran has not signed up for peace, as its foreign minister recently wrote in the Guardian. Iran is merely utilising the tools given to it by western democracies, in order to stave off international pressure. We must be clear eyed when it comes to Tehrans intentions. If the past teaches us anything about the current regime, it is this: the terror will continue, as will Tehrans destructive regional role, and the military nuclear project will be close on its heels."
"They say actions speak louder than words, and perhaps this universal truth is even more evident in the Middle East, where the sound of rocket fire and the explosion of bombs often drowns out the written word. We in Israel know all about that, having been at the receiving end of gun and missile fire for decades. In that time we have learned, the hard way, that it is only our actions that ensure our survival, not written promises. Our neighbourhood does not play by western rules, and as the only democracy in the region we know all too well what it is to fight an enemy that abuses our values. In our region, one regime stands out above all others in its destructive role. That same regime is attempting to camouflage its actions by employing diplomacy and by relying on the short memory of international public opinion. The ayatollahs in Tehran would have us believe that they are a peace-loving regime that seeks a tranquil, stable Middle East, and that the Vienna nuclear deal is proof of their benign intentions. But reality is telling us a different story, one that totally contradicts this narrative. If we are to understand the Iranian regime, we must look at what it is doing, not just saying, and ask ourselves whether its actions are compatible not just with western interests but, more important, with western values.   Related: Iran nuclear deal reached in Vienna    Iran is the worlds leading state-sponsor of terrorism, arming and supporting Hezbollah, Hamas, Palestinian Islamic Jihad, the Syrian regime (itself a leading state-sponsor of terrorism), and Houthi rebels in Yemen. It employs the IRGC (Irans Revolutionary Guards force) to perpetrate acts of terrorism throughout the world, from Asia to Europe to the United States. The regime also maintains terror cells in Africa and Latin America, where it has carried out deadly attacks. Interpol international arrest warrants “ known as red notices “ are currently issued against senior Iranian officials for their active role in planning the bombing of the Amia Jewish community centre in Buenos Aires, where 85 people lost their lives. Irans destructive regional role reflects its internal crimes as well: executions under the moderate president, Hassan Rouhani, are up to 700 this year alone, more individuals per capita than any other country in the world; gay people are persecuted (the offence of homosexuality carrying a death sentence), as are religious minorities. The UN has found that the human rights situation in Iran is worsening under the current regime, heavily criticising Iran for arresting journalists, lawyers and opposition politicians. The independent watchdog Freedom House rates Irans press and internet bluntly as not free. Tehrans military nuclear record is well documented: the regime has been working clandestinely for decades to develop a nuclear weapon, coming clean about its enrichment facilities only when these were discovered by opposition groups, and coming to the negotiating table only under the heavy pressure of comprehensive international sanctions. Even today, with the Vienna deal signed, the concerns of the International Atomic Energy Agency “ the international nuclear watchdog “ on the military dimensions of the Iranian nuclear project remain unanswered. Rouhani himself boasted of how in previous rounds of negotiations he took advantage of talks in European capitals to secretly advance the nuclear military project.    The ayatollahs would have us believe they are a peace-loving regime that seeks a tranquil, stable Middle East    Irans leaders tweet and write opinion pieces in the western press, while social media, including Twitter, YouTube and Facebook are banned in their own country, and bloggers and online activists face jail terms for expressing their ideas online. Therefore we should be wary of Irans words, and look to its actions instead: the terror attacks carried out in numerous countries, the funding of the murderous Assad regime, of Hezbollah, Hamas, Islamic Jihad, the mass executions, the persecution of gay people, of political activists, the censorship of free thought, and the track record of subterfuge on its nuclear military programme. Iran does not conform to the most basic of western values on any of these issues. The Vienna nuclear agreement addresses none of this, nor does it give Iran any incentive to change its behaviour. In a conversation I had a decade ago, while I was foreign minister, with one of the European heads of state, he raised a concern that tougher sanctions on Iran would raise the price of an oil barrel to more than $100. I responded by saying that we have to first take care of the living and then take care of the standard of living. The west must look beyond its economic interests, and ask itself what values it has in common with the ayatollahs in Tehran “ and it must not let itself become confused. Iran has not signed up for peace, as its foreign minister recently wrote in the Guardian. Iran is merely utilising the tools given to it by western democracies, in order to stave off international pressure. We must be clear eyed when it comes to Tehrans intentions. If the past teaches us anything about the current regime, it is this: the terror will continue, as will Tehrans destructive regional role, and the military nuclear project will be close on its heels."
"They say actions speak louder than words, and perhaps this universal truth is even more evident in the Middle East, where the sound of rocket fire and the explosion of bombs often drowns out the written word. We in Israel know all about that, having been at the receiving end of gun and missile fire for decades. In that time we have learned, the hard way, that it is only our actions that ensure our survival, not written promises. Our neighbourhood does not play by western rules, and as the only democracy in the region we know all too well what it is to fight an enemy that abuses our values. In our region, one regime stands out above all others in its destructive role. That same regime is attempting to camouflage its actions by employing diplomacy and by relying on the short memory of international public opinion. The ayatollahs in Tehran would have us believe that they are a peace-loving regime that seeks a tranquil, stable Middle East, and that the Vienna nuclear deal is proof of their benign intentions. But reality is telling us a different story, one that totally contradicts this narrative. If we are to understand the Iranian regime, we must look at what it is doing, not just saying, and ask ourselves whether its actions are compatible not just with western interests but, more important, with western values.   Related: Iran nuclear deal reached in Vienna    Iran is the worlds leading state-sponsor of terrorism, arming and supporting Hezbollah, Hamas, Palestinian Islamic Jihad, the Syrian regime (itself a leading state-sponsor of terrorism), and Houthi rebels in Yemen. It employs the IRGC (Irans Revolutionary Guards force) to perpetrate acts of terrorism throughout the world, from Asia to Europe to the United States. The regime also maintains terror cells in Africa and Latin America, where it has carried out deadly attacks. Interpol international arrest warrants “ known as red notices “ are currently issued against senior Iranian officials for their active role in planning the bombing of the Amia Jewish community centre in Buenos Aires, where 85 people lost their lives. Irans destructive regional role reflects its internal crimes as well: executions under the moderate president, Hassan Rouhani, are up to 700 this year alone, more individuals per capita than any other country in the world; gay people are persecuted (the offence of homosexuality carrying a death sentence), as are religious minorities. The UN has found that the human rights situation in Iran is worsening under the current regime, heavily criticising Iran for arresting journalists, lawyers and opposition politicians. The independent watchdog Freedom House rates Irans press and internet bluntly as not free. Tehrans military nuclear record is well documented: the regime has been working clandestinely for decades to develop a nuclear weapon, coming clean about its enrichment facilities only when these were discovered by opposition groups, and coming to the negotiating table only under the heavy pressure of comprehensive international sanctions. Even today, with the Vienna deal signed, the concerns of the International Atomic Energy Agency “ the international nuclear watchdog “ on the military dimensions of the Iranian nuclear project remain unanswered. Rouhani himself boasted of how in previous rounds of negotiations he took advantage of talks in European capitals to secretly advance the nuclear military project.    The ayatollahs would have us believe they are a peace-loving regime that seeks a tranquil, stable Middle East    Irans leaders tweet and write opinion pieces in the western press, while social media, including Twitter, YouTube and Facebook are banned in their own country, and bloggers and online activists face jail terms for expressing their ideas online. Therefore we should be wary of Irans words, and look to its actions instead: the terror attacks carried out in numerous countries, the funding of the murderous Assad regime, of Hezbollah, Hamas, Islamic Jihad, the mass executions, the persecution of gay people, of political activists, the censorship of free thought, and the track record of subterfuge on its nuclear military programme. Iran does not conform to the most basic of western values on any of these issues. The Vienna nuclear agreement addresses none of this, nor does it give Iran any incentive to change its behaviour. In a conversation I had a decade ago, while I was foreign minister, with one of the European heads of state, he raised a concern that tougher sanctions on Iran would raise the price of an oil barrel to more than $100. I responded by saying that we have to first take care of the living and then take care of the standard of living. The west must look beyond its economic interests, and ask itself what values it has in common with the ayatollahs in Tehran “ and it must not let itself become confused. Iran has not signed up for peace, as its foreign minister recently wrote in the Guardian. Iran is merely utilising the tools given to it by western democracies, in order to stave off international pressure. We must be clear eyed when it comes to Tehrans intentions. If the past teaches us anything about the current regime, it is this: the terror will continue, as will Tehrans destructive regional role, and the military nuclear project will be close on its heels."
"They say actions speak louder than words, and perhaps this universal truth is even more evident in the Middle East, where the sound of rocket fire and the explosion of bombs often drowns out the written word. We in Israel know all about that, having been at the receiving end of gun and missile fire for decades. In that time we have learned, the hard way, that it is only our actions that ensure our survival, not written promises. Our neighbourhood does not play by western rules, and as the only democracy in the region we know all too well what it is to fight an enemy that abuses our values. In our region, one regime stands out above all others in its destructive role. That same regime is attempting to camouflage its actions by employing diplomacy and by relying on the short memory of international public opinion. The ayatollahs in Tehran would have us believe that they are a peace-loving regime that seeks a tranquil, stable Middle East, and that the Vienna nuclear deal is proof of their benign intentions. But reality is telling us a different story, one that totally contradicts this narrative. If we are to understand the Iranian regime, we must look at what it is doing, not just saying, and ask ourselves whether its actions are compatible not just with western interests but, more important, with western values.   Related: Iran nuclear deal reached in Vienna    Iran is the worlds leading state-sponsor of terrorism, arming and supporting Hezbollah, Hamas, Palestinian Islamic Jihad, the Syrian regime (itself a leading state-sponsor of terrorism), and Houthi rebels in Yemen. It employs the IRGC (Irans Revolutionary Guards force) to perpetrate acts of terrorism throughout the world, from Asia to Europe to the United States. The regime also maintains terror cells in Africa and Latin America, where it has carried out deadly attacks. Interpol international arrest warrants “ known as red notices “ are currently issued against senior Iranian officials for their active role in planning the bombing of the Amia Jewish community centre in Buenos Aires, where 85 people lost their lives. Irans destructive regional role reflects its internal crimes as well: executions under the moderate president, Hassan Rouhani, are up to 700 this year alone, more individuals per capita than any other country in the world; gay people are persecuted (the offence of homosexuality carrying a death sentence), as are religious minorities. The UN has found that the human rights situation in Iran is worsening under the current regime, heavily criticising Iran for arresting journalists, lawyers and opposition politicians. The independent watchdog Freedom House rates Irans press and internet bluntly as not free. Tehrans military nuclear record is well documented: the regime has been working clandestinely for decades to develop a nuclear weapon, coming clean about its enrichment facilities only when these were discovered by opposition groups, and coming to the negotiating table only under the heavy pressure of comprehensive international sanctions. Even today, with the Vienna deal signed, the concerns of the International Atomic Energy Agency “ the international nuclear watchdog “ on the military dimensions of the Iranian nuclear project remain unanswered. Rouhani himself boasted of how in previous rounds of negotiations he took advantage of talks in European capitals to secretly advance the nuclear military project.    The ayatollahs would have us believe they are a peace-loving regime that seeks a tranquil, stable Middle East    Irans leaders tweet and write opinion pieces in the western press, while social media, including Twitter, YouTube and Facebook are banned in their own country, and bloggers and online activists face jail terms for expressing their ideas online. Therefore we should be wary of Irans words, and look to its actions instead: the terror attacks carried out in numerous countries, the funding of the murderous Assad regime, of Hezbollah, Hamas, Islamic Jihad, the mass executions, the persecution of gay people, of political activists, the censorship of free thought, and the track record of subterfuge on its nuclear military programme. Iran does not conform to the most basic of western values on any of these issues. The Vienna nuclear agreement addresses none of this, nor does it give Iran any incentive to change its behaviour. In a conversation I had a decade ago, while I was foreign minister, with one of the European heads of state, he raised a concern that tougher sanctions on Iran would raise the price of an oil barrel to more than $100. I responded by saying that we have to first take care of the living and then take care of the standard of living. The west must look beyond its economic interests, and ask itself what values it has in common with the ayatollahs in Tehran “ and it must not let itself become confused. Iran has not signed up for peace, as its foreign minister recently wrote in the Guardian. Iran is merely utilising the tools given to it by western democracies, in order to stave off international pressure. We must be clear eyed when it comes to Tehrans intentions. If the past teaches us anything about the current regime, it is this: the terror will continue, as will Tehrans destructive regional role, and the military nuclear project will be close on its heels."
"Everywhere Don King has gone in Cairo this week he has caused a stir. When we pulled up at the Pyramids on Wednesday, locals peered in the window of our mini-bus and started shouting Its Muhammad Ali! Maybe King would take that as a compliment, even if Ali, struggling with Parkinsons disease since 1984, does not stir far from his easy-chair these days. Because, as large a presence as King has been and would love to be again, Ali was once the most famous athlete in the world. He was probably, for a time, the most famous person in the world “ more famous, even, than The Beatles, whom John Lennon reckoned were more famous than Jesus Christ. At his height, Ali happily stood alongside King, and their grins and chutzpah lit up the 60s and 70s. They did not part on the best of terms near the end of his career, but they have been reconciled a good few years now, old bruises healed, bad memories forgotten. Those were crazy days “ and a little of that madness returned to the Egyptian capital this week as King began what, to anyone else, would be an improbable quest: to bring a world heavyweight title fight to a country mired in financial distress, social unrest and parked next to the running sore that is modern Israel. If they did not know King when he walked down the street, there was little doubt they would not forget him. At the Pyramids, he chatted for ages with the young urchins trying to sell their tat, bargaining with them before settling on an agreed sum. He probably drove harder bargains with the casino bosses of Las Vegas, but even some of those lucrative deals cannot have made him smile as much. He was in his element, talking to young hustlers trying to survive. Life, meanwhile, carried on chaotically around us. On Tuesday night, even as he won an assurance from the tourism minister, Hisham Zazou, that his proposal would receive his wholehearted backing, the US secretary of state, John Kerry, was meeting with the president, Abdel Fattah al-Sisi, to work on a ceasefire in Israel. Airlines had just stopped landing in Tel Aviv, after a bomb near the airport, and the air was thick with uncertainty and tension. There was more at stake here than a mere boxing match. King says he realises that. He says he wants to help Egypt restore its shredded tourism industry (when we went around the Pyramids, there were maybe a few dozen tourists for company; before the revolution, they attracted 20,000 visitors a day). No doubt he does. But he is still in the Don King industry “ and there is business to be done. King has another champion now, the 35-year-old Haitian Bermane Stiverne, and he wants him to defend his World Boxing Council title against the fearsome Deontay Wilder in November in the shadows of the Pyramids (or maybe in the more atmospheric setting of Luxor), rounding out a promotional trilogy separated by 40 years: the Rumble in the Jungle, the 1975 Thrilla in Manila and, if he pulls it off, King Of The Nile. A more significant anniversary marks Kings visit, however, one with deep cultural and religious connotations. It is 50 years since Ali visited Egypt, shortly after he took the world heavyweight title from Sonny Liston, then announced he was a Muslim. Overnight, the new champion became a villain in his own land “ but not beyond those gilded shores. There are pictures of Ali visiting Cairos Al-Hussein mosque in June of 1964, praying with local devotees (of the original Muhammad), and he pronounced more loudly about his faith than he did about his boxing. In 1975, a year after regaining the title for the third time with that Rumble against George Foreman, Ali told Playboy magazine: You can go to Japan, China, all the European, African, Arab, and South American countries and, man, they know me. I cant name a country where they dont know me. If another fighters goin to be that big, hes goin to have to be a Muslim, or else he wont get to nations like Indonesia, Lebanon, Iran, Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, Syria, Egypt, and Turkey “ those are all countries that dont usually follow boxing. He might even have to be named Muhammad because Muhammad is the most common name in the world. Don King is not a Muslim, but he knows how to be a good guest. All week, he has chanted, Ana Masry! Ana Masry! (I am an Egyptian), and Im sure his audience were half way to believing him. He hopes to meet with president Sisi before he returns to the United States next Wednesday and I wanted to know if he would use his people skills for something far more important than this fight: the release of three al-Jazeera journalists jailed for from seven to 10 years for allegedly inciting unrest. Ill do my best, he said. Ill do my best. Im getting a good vibe from them. Part of the sell? Maybe. But, if King pulled off that long shot, it would be his greatest victory."
"Everywhere Don King has gone in Cairo this week he has caused a stir. When we pulled up at the Pyramids on Wednesday, locals peered in the window of our mini-bus and started shouting Its Muhammad Ali! Maybe King would take that as a compliment, even if Ali, struggling with Parkinsons disease since 1984, does not stir far from his easy-chair these days. Because, as large a presence as King has been and would love to be again, Ali was once the most famous athlete in the world. He was probably, for a time, the most famous person in the world “ more famous, even, than The Beatles, whom John Lennon reckoned were more famous than Jesus Christ. At his height, Ali happily stood alongside King, and their grins and chutzpah lit up the 60s and 70s. They did not part on the best of terms near the end of his career, but they have been reconciled a good few years now, old bruises healed, bad memories forgotten. Those were crazy days “ and a little of that madness returned to the Egyptian capital this week as King began what, to anyone else, would be an improbable quest: to bring a world heavyweight title fight to a country mired in financial distress, social unrest and parked next to the running sore that is modern Israel. If they did not know King when he walked down the street, there was little doubt they would not forget him. At the Pyramids, he chatted for ages with the young urchins trying to sell their tat, bargaining with them before settling on an agreed sum. He probably drove harder bargains with the casino bosses of Las Vegas, but even some of those lucrative deals cannot have made him smile as much. He was in his element, talking to young hustlers trying to survive. Life, meanwhile, carried on chaotically around us. On Tuesday night, even as he won an assurance from the tourism minister, Hisham Zazou, that his proposal would receive his wholehearted backing, the US secretary of state, John Kerry, was meeting with the president, Abdel Fattah al-Sisi, to work on a ceasefire in Israel. Airlines had just stopped landing in Tel Aviv, after a bomb near the airport, and the air was thick with uncertainty and tension. There was more at stake here than a mere boxing match. King says he realises that. He says he wants to help Egypt restore its shredded tourism industry (when we went around the Pyramids, there were maybe a few dozen tourists for company; before the revolution, they attracted 20,000 visitors a day). No doubt he does. But he is still in the Don King industry “ and there is business to be done. King has another champion now, the 35-year-old Haitian Bermane Stiverne, and he wants him to defend his World Boxing Council title against the fearsome Deontay Wilder in November in the shadows of the Pyramids (or maybe in the more atmospheric setting of Luxor), rounding out a promotional trilogy separated by 40 years: the Rumble in the Jungle, the 1975 Thrilla in Manila and, if he pulls it off, King Of The Nile. A more significant anniversary marks Kings visit, however, one with deep cultural and religious connotations. It is 50 years since Ali visited Egypt, shortly after he took the world heavyweight title from Sonny Liston, then announced he was a Muslim. Overnight, the new champion became a villain in his own land “ but not beyond those gilded shores. There are pictures of Ali visiting Cairos Al-Hussein mosque in June of 1964, praying with local devotees (of the original Muhammad), and he pronounced more loudly about his faith than he did about his boxing. In 1975, a year after regaining the title for the third time with that Rumble against George Foreman, Ali told Playboy magazine: You can go to Japan, China, all the European, African, Arab, and South American countries and, man, they know me. I cant name a country where they dont know me. If another fighters goin to be that big, hes goin to have to be a Muslim, or else he wont get to nations like Indonesia, Lebanon, Iran, Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, Syria, Egypt, and Turkey “ those are all countries that dont usually follow boxing. He might even have to be named Muhammad because Muhammad is the most common name in the world. Don King is not a Muslim, but he knows how to be a good guest. All week, he has chanted, Ana Masry! Ana Masry! (I am an Egyptian), and Im sure his audience were half way to believing him. He hopes to meet with president Sisi before he returns to the United States next Wednesday and I wanted to know if he would use his people skills for something far more important than this fight: the release of three al-Jazeera journalists jailed for from seven to 10 years for allegedly inciting unrest. Ill do my best, he said. Ill do my best. Im getting a good vibe from them. Part of the sell? Maybe. But, if King pulled off that long shot, it would be his greatest victory."
"Everywhere Don King has gone in Cairo this week he has caused a stir. When we pulled up at the Pyramids on Wednesday, locals peered in the window of our mini-bus and started shouting Its Muhammad Ali! Maybe King would take that as a compliment, even if Ali, struggling with Parkinsons disease since 1984, does not stir far from his easy-chair these days. Because, as large a presence as King has been and would love to be again, Ali was once the most famous athlete in the world. He was probably, for a time, the most famous person in the world “ more famous, even, than The Beatles, whom John Lennon reckoned were more famous than Jesus Christ. At his height, Ali happily stood alongside King, and their grins and chutzpah lit up the 60s and 70s. They did not part on the best of terms near the end of his career, but they have been reconciled a good few years now, old bruises healed, bad memories forgotten. Those were crazy days “ and a little of that madness returned to the Egyptian capital this week as King began what, to anyone else, would be an improbable quest: to bring a world heavyweight title fight to a country mired in financial distress, social unrest and parked next to the running sore that is modern Israel. If they did not know King when he walked down the street, there was little doubt they would not forget him. At the Pyramids, he chatted for ages with the young urchins trying to sell their tat, bargaining with them before settling on an agreed sum. He probably drove harder bargains with the casino bosses of Las Vegas, but even some of those lucrative deals cannot have made him smile as much. He was in his element, talking to young hustlers trying to survive. Life, meanwhile, carried on chaotically around us. On Tuesday night, even as he won an assurance from the tourism minister, Hisham Zazou, that his proposal would receive his wholehearted backing, the US secretary of state, John Kerry, was meeting with the president, Abdel Fattah al-Sisi, to work on a ceasefire in Israel. Airlines had just stopped landing in Tel Aviv, after a bomb near the airport, and the air was thick with uncertainty and tension. There was more at stake here than a mere boxing match. King says he realises that. He says he wants to help Egypt restore its shredded tourism industry (when we went around the Pyramids, there were maybe a few dozen tourists for company; before the revolution, they attracted 20,000 visitors a day). No doubt he does. But he is still in the Don King industry “ and there is business to be done. King has another champion now, the 35-year-old Haitian Bermane Stiverne, and he wants him to defend his World Boxing Council title against the fearsome Deontay Wilder in November in the shadows of the Pyramids (or maybe in the more atmospheric setting of Luxor), rounding out a promotional trilogy separated by 40 years: the Rumble in the Jungle, the 1975 Thrilla in Manila and, if he pulls it off, King Of The Nile. A more significant anniversary marks Kings visit, however, one with deep cultural and religious connotations. It is 50 years since Ali visited Egypt, shortly after he took the world heavyweight title from Sonny Liston, then announced he was a Muslim. Overnight, the new champion became a villain in his own land “ but not beyond those gilded shores. There are pictures of Ali visiting Cairos Al-Hussein mosque in June of 1964, praying with local devotees (of the original Muhammad), and he pronounced more loudly about his faith than he did about his boxing. In 1975, a year after regaining the title for the third time with that Rumble against George Foreman, Ali told Playboy magazine: You can go to Japan, China, all the European, African, Arab, and South American countries and, man, they know me. I cant name a country where they dont know me. If another fighters goin to be that big, hes goin to have to be a Muslim, or else he wont get to nations like Indonesia, Lebanon, Iran, Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, Syria, Egypt, and Turkey “ those are all countries that dont usually follow boxing. He might even have to be named Muhammad because Muhammad is the most common name in the world. Don King is not a Muslim, but he knows how to be a good guest. All week, he has chanted, Ana Masry! Ana Masry! (I am an Egyptian), and Im sure his audience were half way to believing him. He hopes to meet with president Sisi before he returns to the United States next Wednesday and I wanted to know if he would use his people skills for something far more important than this fight: the release of three al-Jazeera journalists jailed for from seven to 10 years for allegedly inciting unrest. Ill do my best, he said. Ill do my best. Im getting a good vibe from them. Part of the sell? Maybe. But, if King pulled off that long shot, it would be his greatest victory."
"Everywhere Don King has gone in Cairo this week he has caused a stir. When we pulled up at the Pyramids on Wednesday, locals peered in the window of our mini-bus and started shouting Its Muhammad Ali! Maybe King would take that as a compliment, even if Ali, struggling with Parkinsons disease since 1984, does not stir far from his easy-chair these days. Because, as large a presence as King has been and would love to be again, Ali was once the most famous athlete in the world. He was probably, for a time, the most famous person in the world “ more famous, even, than The Beatles, whom John Lennon reckoned were more famous than Jesus Christ. At his height, Ali happily stood alongside King, and their grins and chutzpah lit up the 60s and 70s. They did not part on the best of terms near the end of his career, but they have been reconciled a good few years now, old bruises healed, bad memories forgotten. Those were crazy days “ and a little of that madness returned to the Egyptian capital this week as King began what, to anyone else, would be an improbable quest: to bring a world heavyweight title fight to a country mired in financial distress, social unrest and parked next to the running sore that is modern Israel. If they did not know King when he walked down the street, there was little doubt they would not forget him. At the Pyramids, he chatted for ages with the young urchins trying to sell their tat, bargaining with them before settling on an agreed sum. He probably drove harder bargains with the casino bosses of Las Vegas, but even some of those lucrative deals cannot have made him smile as much. He was in his element, talking to young hustlers trying to survive. Life, meanwhile, carried on chaotically around us. On Tuesday night, even as he won an assurance from the tourism minister, Hisham Zazou, that his proposal would receive his wholehearted backing, the US secretary of state, John Kerry, was meeting with the president, Abdel Fattah al-Sisi, to work on a ceasefire in Israel. Airlines had just stopped landing in Tel Aviv, after a bomb near the airport, and the air was thick with uncertainty and tension. There was more at stake here than a mere boxing match. King says he realises that. He says he wants to help Egypt restore its shredded tourism industry (when we went around the Pyramids, there were maybe a few dozen tourists for company; before the revolution, they attracted 20,000 visitors a day). No doubt he does. But he is still in the Don King industry “ and there is business to be done. King has another champion now, the 35-year-old Haitian Bermane Stiverne, and he wants him to defend his World Boxing Council title against the fearsome Deontay Wilder in November in the shadows of the Pyramids (or maybe in the more atmospheric setting of Luxor), rounding out a promotional trilogy separated by 40 years: the Rumble in the Jungle, the 1975 Thrilla in Manila and, if he pulls it off, King Of The Nile. A more significant anniversary marks Kings visit, however, one with deep cultural and religious connotations. It is 50 years since Ali visited Egypt, shortly after he took the world heavyweight title from Sonny Liston, then announced he was a Muslim. Overnight, the new champion became a villain in his own land “ but not beyond those gilded shores. There are pictures of Ali visiting Cairos Al-Hussein mosque in June of 1964, praying with local devotees (of the original Muhammad), and he pronounced more loudly about his faith than he did about his boxing. In 1975, a year after regaining the title for the third time with that Rumble against George Foreman, Ali told Playboy magazine: You can go to Japan, China, all the European, African, Arab, and South American countries and, man, they know me. I cant name a country where they dont know me. If another fighters goin to be that big, hes goin to have to be a Muslim, or else he wont get to nations like Indonesia, Lebanon, Iran, Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, Syria, Egypt, and Turkey “ those are all countries that dont usually follow boxing. He might even have to be named Muhammad because Muhammad is the most common name in the world. Don King is not a Muslim, but he knows how to be a good guest. All week, he has chanted, Ana Masry! Ana Masry! (I am an Egyptian), and Im sure his audience were half way to believing him. He hopes to meet with president Sisi before he returns to the United States next Wednesday and I wanted to know if he would use his people skills for something far more important than this fight: the release of three al-Jazeera journalists jailed for from seven to 10 years for allegedly inciting unrest. Ill do my best, he said. Ill do my best. Im getting a good vibe from them. Part of the sell? Maybe. But, if King pulled off that long shot, it would be his greatest victory."
"Everywhere Don King has gone in Cairo this week he has caused a stir. When we pulled up at the Pyramids on Wednesday, locals peered in the window of our mini-bus and started shouting Its Muhammad Ali! Maybe King would take that as a compliment, even if Ali, struggling with Parkinsons disease since 1984, does not stir far from his easy-chair these days. Because, as large a presence as King has been and would love to be again, Ali was once the most famous athlete in the world. He was probably, for a time, the most famous person in the world “ more famous, even, than The Beatles, whom John Lennon reckoned were more famous than Jesus Christ. At his height, Ali happily stood alongside King, and their grins and chutzpah lit up the 60s and 70s. They did not part on the best of terms near the end of his career, but they have been reconciled a good few years now, old bruises healed, bad memories forgotten. Those were crazy days “ and a little of that madness returned to the Egyptian capital this week as King began what, to anyone else, would be an improbable quest: to bring a world heavyweight title fight to a country mired in financial distress, social unrest and parked next to the running sore that is modern Israel. If they did not know King when he walked down the street, there was little doubt they would not forget him. At the Pyramids, he chatted for ages with the young urchins trying to sell their tat, bargaining with them before settling on an agreed sum. He probably drove harder bargains with the casino bosses of Las Vegas, but even some of those lucrative deals cannot have made him smile as much. He was in his element, talking to young hustlers trying to survive. Life, meanwhile, carried on chaotically around us. On Tuesday night, even as he won an assurance from the tourism minister, Hisham Zazou, that his proposal would receive his wholehearted backing, the US secretary of state, John Kerry, was meeting with the president, Abdel Fattah al-Sisi, to work on a ceasefire in Israel. Airlines had just stopped landing in Tel Aviv, after a bomb near the airport, and the air was thick with uncertainty and tension. There was more at stake here than a mere boxing match. King says he realises that. He says he wants to help Egypt restore its shredded tourism industry (when we went around the Pyramids, there were maybe a few dozen tourists for company; before the revolution, they attracted 20,000 visitors a day). No doubt he does. But he is still in the Don King industry “ and there is business to be done. King has another champion now, the 35-year-old Haitian Bermane Stiverne, and he wants him to defend his World Boxing Council title against the fearsome Deontay Wilder in November in the shadows of the Pyramids (or maybe in the more atmospheric setting of Luxor), rounding out a promotional trilogy separated by 40 years: the Rumble in the Jungle, the 1975 Thrilla in Manila and, if he pulls it off, King Of The Nile. A more significant anniversary marks Kings visit, however, one with deep cultural and religious connotations. It is 50 years since Ali visited Egypt, shortly after he took the world heavyweight title from Sonny Liston, then announced he was a Muslim. Overnight, the new champion became a villain in his own land “ but not beyond those gilded shores. There are pictures of Ali visiting Cairos Al-Hussein mosque in June of 1964, praying with local devotees (of the original Muhammad), and he pronounced more loudly about his faith than he did about his boxing. In 1975, a year after regaining the title for the third time with that Rumble against George Foreman, Ali told Playboy magazine: You can go to Japan, China, all the European, African, Arab, and South American countries and, man, they know me. I cant name a country where they dont know me. If another fighters goin to be that big, hes goin to have to be a Muslim, or else he wont get to nations like Indonesia, Lebanon, Iran, Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, Syria, Egypt, and Turkey “ those are all countries that dont usually follow boxing. He might even have to be named Muhammad because Muhammad is the most common name in the world. Don King is not a Muslim, but he knows how to be a good guest. All week, he has chanted, Ana Masry! Ana Masry! (I am an Egyptian), and Im sure his audience were half way to believing him. He hopes to meet with president Sisi before he returns to the United States next Wednesday and I wanted to know if he would use his people skills for something far more important than this fight: the release of three al-Jazeera journalists jailed for from seven to 10 years for allegedly inciting unrest. Ill do my best, he said. Ill do my best. Im getting a good vibe from them. Part of the sell? Maybe. But, if King pulled off that long shot, it would be his greatest victory."
"Some people with good memories may have noted something odd about Tuesdays coverage of the prime ministers statement on the drone killing of Reyaad Khan. Had they not read that story somewhere before?  Yes... and no. It is true that national newspapers reported on 21 July that Reyaad Khan had been killed in a drone strike. But those reports, it appears, were incorrect. At the time it was evidently thought he had been the victim of a US drone attack. Hence this crop of headlines: Jihadist who wanted to be Britains first Asian PM ˜killed in drone strike (Daily Telegraph); British ISIS fighter who posed next to Ed Balls and dreamed of becoming the first Asian Prime Minister ˜is killed in drone strike (Daily Mail) Boy who wanted to be PM ˜has died on jihad in Syria (The Times) and Briton Reyaad Khan believed killed in air strike on Islamic State in Syria (The Guardian) among others. Note the caution, evidenced by the use of quotation marks in citing three of those headlines and the Guardians reference to believed.  In fact, so I am informed, Khan did not die on that occasion. David Camerons statement to MPs was unequivocal: after meticulous planning Khan was killed on 21 August by an RAF drone. Hence the crop of headlines They got what they deserved (Mail); MI5 foil plot to kill Queen (Daily Express); British jihadists in Syria killed by drones (Times); Cameron: I approved drone killing of UK jihadis in Syria (Guardian) and the Suns adulatory Wham! Bam! Thank you Cam. Sure, its an amazing coincidence that could well fuel conspiracy theories, but I guess well need to see this as a truth-stranger-than-fiction matter. I am surprised, however, that I could find no mention of the papers pointing to their previous errors. Surprised? No, youre right, not really... "
"Many will have mixed feelings after the news that an RAF drone strike killed two British citizens fighting with Islamic State in Syria (Front page, 8 September). Few people will believe that Reyaad Khan and Ruhul Amin were not guilty of terrible acts of violence, in a conflict that is killing thousands and creating untold human suffering. Many will be pleased that the UK government has finally taken action that will send a clear message to other fighters and potential jihadis that they are not beyond the reach of retribution. I have no doubt that David Cameron and the UK government believe their actions are essential to take a firm stance against terrorism and violence. However, besides the obvious question of legality, we also have to consider whether this action will make us safer in the long term. A key question is whether the individuals and communities this tough message is intended for will actually be deterred by the threat of retaliation. All the evidence from the past suggests it will not. Each time we abandon the belief that deliberate killing is wrong under any circumstances, we reinforce the message that our supposed principles of justice and the rule of law are a false hypocrisy “ that human rights only apply if you are one of us, not one of them. Just as the inhuman torture of terrorist suspects in GuantÃ¡namo Bay and Abu Ghraib became a lightning rod for recruitment to Isis, this will be seen by its supporters as further evidence of the need to join the battle. In the end all we have done is reinforce by our own actions the validity of the core principle that lies at the heart of all terrorist groups “ that the end justifies the means. This is why Gandhi was opposed to any form of violence as a means to achieve policy objectives. As he put it: I object to violence because when it appears to do good, the good is only temporary; the evil it does is permanent. We would do well to reflect on whether the long-term effect of UK direct action in Syria will be to improve our security inÂ the way that the government claims.Rob BruceBlackwood, Caerphillyshire"
"For anyone concerned about the use of drones, or remotely piloted aircraft as the industry insists on calling them, the nature of recent coverage has been somewhat perturbing. With the normalisation of the use of military drones, media interest has waned and they now seem far more interested in writing about toy drones landing on the White House lawn than the White Houses use of drones for targeted assassination. Just this week, much ink has been spilt covering the arrest of an amateur pilot for thoughtlessly flying a drone near parliament, while the use of armed British drones in Syria “ breaching assurances by the defence secretary, Michael Fallon, against mission creep “ received far less attention. Despite widespread ethical, political and legal misgivings the US and British and forces have carried out numerous drone strikes this year, while the Israelis were accused of an attack using an armed drone on the Golan Heights. And as military spokespeople repeat bland assurances about the precise nature of such operations, civilians continue to die. In Somalia, there has been a surge in the use of drones, with three senior al-Shabaab figures killed in separate US-targeted assassinations in the past three months. The latest strike, confirmed by the Pentagon this week, targeted Adan Garar, who is alleged to have been behind the 2013 attack on the Westgate mall in Kenya. His predecessor as chief of external operations, Yusef Dheeq, was killed in a US drone strike last month reportedly along with four civilians. US drone strikes also continue in Yemen despite the recent coup. It was thought they would be suspended after the ousting of the president, Abd-Rabbu Mansour Hadi, as his authorisation gave them cover under international law. However, Pentagon officials strongly denied there would be any suspension and, as if to prove this, a strike took place almost immediately. This resulted in the deaths of three people including Mohammed Tuaiman, a boy whose father and brother were killed in a drone strike in 2011. The Guardian released a remarkable video with Tuaiman speaking about his life. And while the US has officially declared the war in Afghanistan over, its forces continue drone strikes there too. One in February targeted Abdul Rauf, a former member of the Taliban who had sworn allegiance to Islamic State. Rauf was killed along with an unknown number of other people. The Bureau of Investigative Journalism has recorded about 15 confirmed and reported drones strikes in Afghanistan since the beginning of 2015. Meanwhile Israeli drones apparently carried out an air strike targeting Hezbollah in the Syrian sector of the Golan Heights. The strike killed six members of the group as well as a senior Iranian General Mohammad Ali Allah-Dadi. Scores of media reports claimed it was a helicopter attack. However UN observers reported seeing drones coming from the Israeli side of the border before the strike, seeing smoke over the target and then the drones returning. A UN spokesman condemned the use of drones saying this incident is a violation of the 1974 Agreement on Disengagement between Israeli and Syrian forces. Since last August, Iraq and Syria have been the new front in the drone wars. This week, Syrian air defences shot down a US drone when it flew near Latakia, a stronghold of President Bashar al-Assad. Although US drones have been flying over Syria since last August and British ones since November, this is the first time one has been shot down. It may not be the last. Freelance reporter Chris Woods, who has been monitoring the air war against Isis, reports that there have been 2,900 strikes by manned and unmanned aircraft since August, the majority by the US. Woods has recorded 37 incidents of concern where civilians have reportedly been killed or injured in coalition bombing. Compared with the large number of US strikes, the 170 British strikes are relatively small. However, they are happening at a faster rate than in Afghanistan. British Reapers have already racked up 70 drone strikes in just under five months in Iraq whereas it took almost two years to notch up that amount in Afghanistan. And although the Ministry of Defence insists that its drones are predominately used for surveillance, they are actually undertaking air strikes in Iraq at a slightly higher rate than the manned aircraft. Tornados carried out 90 strikes in 22 weeks, giving a strike rate of 4.09 per week, while Reapers have a strike rate of 4.37 per week. Meanwhile, the recent US defence budget included plans for spending almost $3bn (Â£2bn) on new unmanned systems, while British spending on drones this financial year has reached almost Â£250m on top of the more than Â£2bn previously spent. Other nations are clamouring to acquire armed drones now the US has relaxed its drone export policy and recent pictures of an apparent Chinese armed drone that is claimed to have crashed in Nigeria are a worrying sign of the further spread of such systems. While coverage of the danger of small drones in civil airspace is of course important, scrutiny of the growing use of armed drones around the globe is vital. Without it, the disconnect between us and the wars being waged in our name grows ever greater. From current reporting, you could be forgiven for thinking that drones are no more than a nuisance in the hands of a few reckless individuals. The reality is that armed drones have not only killed many hundreds of innocent civilians, but are also a growing danger to global peace and security. ¢ This article was amended on 25 March 2015 to restore some sentences, cut during the editing process, about the air strike in the Syrian sector of the Golan Heights. It was further amended on 13 April to clarify that UN observers had not witnessed the attack in the Golan Heights. "
"Leading shares in London have suffered their biggest daily fall since early March, closing down 97 points after companies across Europe reported growth was slowing and they were continuing to slash prices. The FTSE 100, where supermarket shares were still reeling from Tescos problems, lost 1.4% to close at 6676.08 after the latest downbeat news from the single currency bloc combined with worries over air strikes in Syria. The latest snapshot of eurozone business activity will heap pressure on the European Central Bank to step up its help for the struggling economy after it showed further contraction in France and a slowdown for manufacturers in the blocs largest economy, Germany. With growth tailing off and inflation worryingly low, the ECB has already cut lending and deposit rates and announced a bond-buying programme earlier this month. Despite the raft of measures from ECB chief Mario Draghi, business activity grew at the slowest pace seen so far this year, according to the Markit Flash Eurozone Composite PMI survey of 5,000 manufacturing and service-sector companies. At 52.3 in September, down from 52.5 in August, the activity index was still above the 50 mark that shows growth, but it defied expectations of no change in a Reuters poll of economists. The survey paints a picture of ongoing malaise in the eurozone economy. With growth of output and demand slowing, employment once again failed to show any meaningful increase. Such torpor meant prices continued to fall as firms fought for customers, which will inevitably heighten concerns that the region is facing deflation, said Chris Williamson, chief economist at survey compilers Markit. The survey data suggest GDP is on course to grow by 0.3% at best in the third quarter, buoyed by a 0.4% expansion in Germany, but dragged down by stagnation in France and sluggish growth in the rest of the region. Growth picked up slightly for German businesses from the 10-month low seen in August, but faster expansion in the service sector was countered by growth all but grinding to a halt in Germanys factories. The manufacturing PMI (purchasing managers index) report for the country signalled the weakest expansion since July 2013 as new orders fell for the first time in more than a year. Frances private sector continued to contract for the fifth month running. The latest PMI data are testimony to the lacklustre nature of the eurozones economic recovery, said Martin van Vliet at ING Financial Markets. He said the survey was pointing to quarterly GDP growth of 0.2%. So the economy retains some forward momentum. But growth momentum is very weak, he said. Markit said that employment taken for the eurozone private sector as a whole was largely unchanged as companies held back from hiring extra staff due to the weak sales growth. Williamson flagged up headwinds for companies from the Ukraine crisis and related Russian sanctions, in addition to domestic economic challenges facing eurozone countries. The danger is that the ECBs efforts to stimulate the economy will prove ineffective in the face of such headwinds, which are exacerbating already-weak demand, he said."
"Leading shares in London have suffered their biggest daily fall since early March, closing down 97 points after companies across Europe reported growth was slowing and they were continuing to slash prices. The FTSE 100, where supermarket shares were still reeling from Tescos problems, lost 1.4% to close at 6676.08 after the latest downbeat news from the single currency bloc combined with worries over air strikes in Syria. The latest snapshot of eurozone business activity will heap pressure on the European Central Bank to step up its help for the struggling economy after it showed further contraction in France and a slowdown for manufacturers in the blocs largest economy, Germany. With growth tailing off and inflation worryingly low, the ECB has already cut lending and deposit rates and announced a bond-buying programme earlier this month. Despite the raft of measures from ECB chief Mario Draghi, business activity grew at the slowest pace seen so far this year, according to the Markit Flash Eurozone Composite PMI survey of 5,000 manufacturing and service-sector companies. At 52.3 in September, down from 52.5 in August, the activity index was still above the 50 mark that shows growth, but it defied expectations of no change in a Reuters poll of economists. The survey paints a picture of ongoing malaise in the eurozone economy. With growth of output and demand slowing, employment once again failed to show any meaningful increase. Such torpor meant prices continued to fall as firms fought for customers, which will inevitably heighten concerns that the region is facing deflation, said Chris Williamson, chief economist at survey compilers Markit. The survey data suggest GDP is on course to grow by 0.3% at best in the third quarter, buoyed by a 0.4% expansion in Germany, but dragged down by stagnation in France and sluggish growth in the rest of the region. Growth picked up slightly for German businesses from the 10-month low seen in August, but faster expansion in the service sector was countered by growth all but grinding to a halt in Germanys factories. The manufacturing PMI (purchasing managers index) report for the country signalled the weakest expansion since July 2013 as new orders fell for the first time in more than a year. Frances private sector continued to contract for the fifth month running. The latest PMI data are testimony to the lacklustre nature of the eurozones economic recovery, said Martin van Vliet at ING Financial Markets. He said the survey was pointing to quarterly GDP growth of 0.2%. So the economy retains some forward momentum. But growth momentum is very weak, he said. Markit said that employment taken for the eurozone private sector as a whole was largely unchanged as companies held back from hiring extra staff due to the weak sales growth. Williamson flagged up headwinds for companies from the Ukraine crisis and related Russian sanctions, in addition to domestic economic challenges facing eurozone countries. The danger is that the ECBs efforts to stimulate the economy will prove ineffective in the face of such headwinds, which are exacerbating already-weak demand, he said."
"David Cameron has made some headline-grabbing election promises, but none so technically implausible as his vow to eliminate communications tools that we cannot read earlier this year. Hes not alone in proposing a ban on effective cryptographic tools. The FBI wants the same thing, and their zeal to protect the state from citizens secrecy has even prompted it to alter its exemplary security advice. The suggestion that Americans should encrypt their devices so as to protect their data when they inevitably lose them, have them stolen or throw them away without securely erasing them has been expunged from the FBIs site. Its impossible to overstate how bonkers the idea of sabotaging cryptography is to people who understand information security. If you want to secure your sensitive data either at rest “ on your hard drive, in the cloud, on that phone you left on the train last week and never saw again “ or on the wire, when youre sending it to your doctor or your bank or to your work colleagues, you have to use good cryptography. Use deliberately compromised cryptography, that has a back door that only the good guys are supposed to have the keys to, and you have effectively no security. You might as well skywrite it as encrypt it with pre-broken, sabotaged encryption. There are two reasons why this is so. First, there is the question of whether encryption can be made secure while still maintaining a master key for the authorities use. As lawyer/computer scientist Jonathan Mayer explained, adding the complexity of master keys to our technology will introduce unquantifiable security risks. Its hard enough getting the security systems that protect our homes, finances, health and privacy to be airtight “ making them airtight except when the authorities dont want them to be is impossible.  Thats a technical argument, and its a good one, but you dont have to be a cryptographer to understand the second problem with back doors: the security services are really bad at overseeing their own behaviour. Once these same people have a back door that gives them access to everything that encryption protects, from the digital locks on your home or office to the information needed to clean out your bank account or read all your email, there will be lots more people wholl want to subvert the vast cohort that is authorised to use the back door, and the incentives for betraying our trust will be much more lavish than anything a tabloid reporter could afford.     Since 2003, Americas Transportation Security Administration has required all locked baggage to have Travelsentry locks, which allow anyone with a widely held master key to open them. Photograph: Mario Anzuoni/Reuters    If you want a preview of what a back door looks like, just look at the US Transportation Security Administrations master keys for the locks on our luggage. Since 2003, the TSA has required all locked baggage travelling within, or transiting through, the USA to be equipped with Travelsentry locks, which have been designed to allow anyone with a widely held master key to open them.  What happened after Travelsentry went into effect? Stuff started going missing from bags. Lots and lots of stuff. A CNN investigation into thefts from bags checked in US airports found thousandsof incidents of theft committed by TSA workers and baggage handlers. And though aggressive investigation work has cut back on theft at some airports, insider thieves are still operating with impunity throughout the country, even managing to smuggle stolen goods off the airfield in airports where all employees are searched on their way in and out of their work areas. The US system is rigged to create a halo of buck-passing unaccountability. When my family picked up our bags from our Easter holiday in the US, we discovered that the TSA had smashed the locks off my nearly new, unlocked, Travelsentry-approved bag, taping it shut after confirming it had nothing dangerous in it, and leaving it completely destroyed in the words of the official BA damage report. British Airways has sensibly declared the damage to be not their problem, as they had nothing to do with destroying the bag. The TSA directed me to a form that generated an illiterate reply from a government subcontractor, sent from a do-not-reply email address, advising that TSA is not liable for any damage to locks or bags that are required to be opened by force for security purposes (the same note had an appendix warning me that I should treat this communication as confidential). Ive yet to have any other communications from the TSA. Making it possible for the state to open your locks in secret means that anyone who works for the state, or anyone who can bribe or coerce anyone who works for the state, can have the run of your life. Cryptographic locks dont just protect our mundane communications: cryptography is the reason why thieves cant impersonate your fob to your cars keyless ignition system; its the reason you can bank online; and its the basis for all trust and security in the 21st century. In her Dimbleby lecture, Martha Lane Fox recalled Aaron Swartzs words: Its not OK not to understand the internet anymore. That goes double for cryptography: any politician caught spouting off about back doors is unfit for office anywhere but Hogwarts, which is also the only educational institution whose computer science department believes in golden keys that only let the right sort of people break your encryption."
"Existing approaches to refugee assistance simply aren't working. That's the topline from our report, Refugee Economies: Rethinking Popular Assumptions, published for World Refugee Day today.Around the world, crises in Syria, Central African Republic and South Sudan continue to increase the number of displaced people inside and outside international borders. More than two-thirds of refugees are in protracted exile for at least five years, often in closed camps and without the right to work or move freely.Current approaches often fail to recognise that refugees have skills, talents and aspirations. Despite the constraints placed on people, vibrant economic systems often thrive below the radar, whether in the formal or informal economy.In Uganda, where we've done our initial research, refugee policies are by no means perfect. But, unlike many other host states, it has a self-reliance strategy and allows refugees the right to work. We surveyed 1,600 refugees in Kampala and two rural refugee settlements to understand refugees' economic lives, including their engagement with the private sector and the ways in which they use technology. Our results challenge five myths about refugees.1) Refugees are economically isolatedRefugee economies are part of complex systems that go beyond their communities and the boundaries of particular settlements. Refugees trade across nationality groups and across international borders. Maize grown in settlements is exported across borders to neighbouring countries. Congolese jewellery and textiles are imported from as far as India and China. Somali shops import tuna from Thailand, via the Middle East and Kenya.2) Refugees are a burden on host statesRefugees make active contributions to the host economy. Many Ugandan business people acknowledge relying upon the presence of refugees. One fruit farmer told us: ""It is hard to imagine Kyangwali's economy without the refugees' presence."" Refugees buy and sell goods and services from and to Ugandan nationals. Many also create job opportunities for others, including by employing Ugandan nationals. In Kampala, 21% of the refugees surveyed employ others, and of those, 40% employ Ugandans.3) Refugees are economically homogenousAlthough there are a range of traditional income-generating activities such as farming in rural areas and running shops and restaurants, we found huge diversity. In the settlements, we found Congolese cinemas, a Somali computer games parlour using recycled consoles and televisions and innovative businesses in areas such as transportation and maize milling that have scaled and often employ others. Even among farmers, income levels vary massively, with huge deviation around the mean of $29 per month.4) Refugees are technology illiterateMany refugees use technology, including mobile phones and the internet, for income-generating activities, often at higher levels than the national population. In Kampala, 96% use mobile phones and 30%  use them for money transfers as part of their primary livelihood strategy. Many refugees also adapt their own appropriate technologies, engaging in forms of ""bottom-up innovation"", often recycling whatever is available to create an entrepreneurial opportunity.5) Refugees are dependent on humanitarian assistanceRefugees are far from uniformly dependent on international assistance. Nearly all “ 99% “ of rural refugee households said they had at least some form of independent income-generating activity. When they were asked what kind of assistance they wanted, financial assistance did not come out top. Instead, opportunities for autonomy “ including education, business training and resettlement “ were valued highly.This data is just a starting point, drawn from one country. More comparative research on the economic lives of refugees and other displaced populations is needed, including in less auspicious regulatory environments. One of the keys to our work was its participatory approach; our team included refugee research assistants, drawn from the different communities. This approach took more time and money than many quick surveys often used in development work. However, it enabled us to build trust, acquire better access and to leave a legacy in terms of training.Although our findings are preliminary, we believe they have significant policy implications. They highlight the value of a market-based approach. Rather than assuming dependency, we need to build upon what there is to understand better refugee economies as complex systems, work to improve those markets and to empower refugees to engage better with those markets.The key to this is helping refugees to help themselves. Refugees are not just passive victims. While many are in need of protection and assistance, it is important to recognise that they have capacities as well as vulnerabilities. Interventions might better nurture such capacities through, for instance, improving education, access to microcredit, business incubation and improved internet access. If we recognise and understand refugee economies, we may be able gradually to turn humanitarian challenges into more sustainable opportunities.Alexander Betts is associate professor in refugee and forced migration studies at the University of Oxford. Read more stories like this: ¢ From Syria to Central African Republic, how to invest in refugees¢ Put innovation at the heart of refugee protection work¢ World Refugee Day: is it time to invest in refugee camps?Join the community of global development professionals and experts. Become a GDPN member to get more stories like this direct to your inbox"
"Two disasters hit Nepal at noon last Saturday. The first wiped out whole towns and villages, and has killed as many as 10,000 people. With the worlds help, that disaster can be and will be rectified. The other disaster was to one of the worlds most exquisite cultural survivals, the ancient settlements of the Kathmandu valley and their Hindu and Buddhist shrines. That disaster, labelled irreversible by some experts, cannot be ignored. It must be rectified and without argument. Pictures from Nepal show temples, stupas, towers and squares collapsed or severely damaged. Protected for centuries by their isolation, they have suffered the one horror from which nothing could protect them: natural catastrophe. Irina Bokova, boss of the ever defeatist Unesco, with seven Nepalese sites on her books, says the damage is extensive and irreversible. The localÂ historian Prushottam Lochan Shrestha agrees that we have lost mostÂ of the world heritage monuments ¦ they cannot be restored.   Related: Nepal earthquake destroys Kathmandu valley's architectural treasures    Initial surveys show appalling losses. Kathmandus lofty Dharahara tower is gone, taking 180 tourists with it. Durbar Square is ruined, the god Garud toppled from its pillar. The ancient Swayambhunath Stupa outside the city stands, but in a wilderness of destruction. In Bhaktapur the delightful Vatsala Durga temple is a pile of rubble. Boudhanath Stupa, one of the largest in the Himalayas, is damaged. Lovely Patans temple complex looks wrecked. These sites and their surrounding lanes and wooden houses were among Asias last remaining examples of what in Europe were medieval cities, rich in shrines, palaces, markets and colour. Their tight-knit urbanism recalled the intimacy of Tudor England. They were part and parcel of Nepals cultural identity. A single clearance bulldozer can wipe all trace of these places off the map. In their wake, Kathmandu can easily become another Asian concrete jungle. It was not just second world war bombers that wiped out Europes old cities, it was the bulldozers and developers that came in their wake. Such vultures circle over these disasters, paid not to conserve but to relieve immediate suffering, with little care for the past or the future. After 1945 the Germans rebuilt the Hanseatic town of LÃ¼beck, casually flattened by the RAF to teach Germany a lesson. The Poles did likewise to central Warsaw, as an act of healing and defiance. Britain did not restore old Coventry or Bristol, their modernist ideologues preferring to erect new Jerusalems in the fashion of the day. As a result LÃ¼beck and Warsaw are now world heritage sites. No one visits Englands new Jerusalems. Of course the first response to the Nepal earthquake must be humanitarian. But populations can and do restore themselves. The loss to a nations culture and identity “ in Nepals case also to its tourist economy “ can be for ever. Such is the trauma of this loss that its recovery can seem unimaginable. Asia currently faces threats to its historic legacy that, were they in Europe, would be rated global cataclysms. The Mesopotamian cities of Nineveh, Nimrud and Hatra have been dynamited. Syrias Aleppo lies in ruins. The Buddhas of Bamiyan remain gaping holes in the mountain. Western intervention in Iraq led to the looting ofÂ the great museum of Baghdad and the obliteration of some ofÂ ChristianitysÂ oldest sites.    Most of European architecture's great works are reproductions, from Venices Campanile to the turrets of Bodiam Castle    The cause in each case is irrelevant, be it war or natural disaster. The remedy is what matters. The answer to cultural destruction is restitution. There is no technical handicap. Money can always be raised, as it was after the Florence floods of 1966. The cost merely defines the value we place on that culture. The arts of conservation have never been so skilled, or scholarship so thorough. The job can be done. One dogma stands in the way of restoring Nepals historic districts, the art-historical cult of the ruin. Destruction is the historical record, it proclaims. What war or nature has destroyed should be conserved as found, lest we stand condemned byÂ theÂ great god, authenticity. If we want to know what the past looked like, we should ask a professional consultantÂ for an artists impression. AllÂ else is pastiche, Disneyfication. Previous generations saw no ideological problem in restoring and if necessary reproducing the legacies of their past. Most of the great works of European architecture are reproductions, from Venices Campanile to the west front of Chartres, from the walls of Carcassonne to the turrets of Bodiam Castle. Kathmandus lofty Dharahara tower, now a pile of stones, was actually the third erected on the site after earthquakes, most recently in 1934. Yet the anti-restitution dogma remains influential. It has gripped 12 years of Unesco wrangling over the Bamiyan Buddhas. Some experts feel the holes should be left as a memorial to Taliban iconoclasm, as part of the statues authentic history. Others argue that the statues were already much restored, and the best counter to their destruction is replacing them. Asians have no aesthetic hang-ups about reproducing images of the Buddha. No one can decide. All reminders of the past, original or replicated, are precious. The buildings and settlements in which our ancestors lived and thought, worked and prayed, are history in four dimensions. They are potent in the imagination, which is why totalitarian regimes so often seek to destroy them. Heritage sites remind people of who they are “ undermining authoritys power to makeÂ them something else. That is whyÂ China is destroying Tibetan and Uighur heritage sites. Of course the Nepalese should decideÂ how far to go in restitution. But money, expertise and encouragement should be no bar. The placid settlements of the Kathmandu valley should return to their former glory. Likewise should Aleppo, Nineveh and Bamiyan. After the food and shelter have arrived, nothing would better lift Nepals pride and morale thanÂ to see itsold splendour rise from the enveloping dust."
"Goslar is a gem of a town in central Germany, nestled in the slopes of the Harz mountains. It is popular with tourists, some of whom come to enjoy its cobbled streets and half-timbered architecture, others to ski or mountain bike, or to trace the footsteps of William Wordsworth who penned the beginnings of the Prelude here while homesick during a visit in the freezing winter of 1798. Now it is becoming famous for another reason. Behind the rich culture is a town with huge problems. It is in one of the weakest economic areas of western Germany, and “ like much of the country, which for years has had one of the lowest birthrates in the world “ it is facing a demographic crisis. Goslar, a town of 50,000, has shrunk by 4,000 in the last decade and is currently losing as many as 1,500 to 2,000 people a year. In some parts of the town, which once thrived on silver mining and smelting as well as a spa, whole housing blocks stand empty while others have been torn down. Its problems were only exacerbated by the end of the cold war, when it lost its status as a major garrison town close to the border with East Germany. Oliver Junk is determined to reverse the trend. The mayor of Goslar has sparked a debate that has spread across Germany by saying he wants more immigrants to settle in the town. While other parts of Europe are shunning refugees, sometimes with great brutality, Junk is delivering an alternative message: bring on the immigrants. There cannot be enough of them, he says.     Oliver Junk, mayor of Goslar.    At a recent gathering in JÃ¼rgenohl, a suburb of Goslar, Junk tapped his feet to a song-and-dance routine being performed for him in Russian by immigrants dressed in the colourful costumes of the former Soviet bloc countries they arrived from around two decades ago. Praising their efforts at integration and thanking them for their contribution to his city, Junk recalled how JÃ¼rgenohl only exists thanks to refugees who built it up after the war. The 39-year-old lawyer, a member of Angela Merkels Christian Democrats, has triggered controversy across Germany by insisting that an influx of immigrants is the best thing that could happen to his shrinking town, which took only 48 refugees last year and, so far this year, 41. We have plenty of empty housing, and rather than see it decay we could give new homes to immigrants, helping them, and so give our town a future, Junk said. Some German commentators say he is a self-publicist, others that he is naive. But it is hard to ignore a man who was elected with almost 94% of the vote in 2011, and for an eight-year term. Junk says he is merely being pragmatic. This, after all, is a man who was nicknamed Duke of Darkness for ordering street lamps to be turned off after midnight to save money. The far right is furious and plans to descend on Goslar on 29 August, for an anti-Junk rally under the slogan Perspectives, not mass immigration.    We have empty housing, and rather than see it decay we could help  immigrants, and give our town a future    This year Germany is set to receive some half a million asylum seekers, although the figure is being revised all the time as the numbers arriving in Europe from Africa and the Middle East continue to soar. That is far more than any other EU country, and more than twice the number Germany took last year. According to an allocation formula known as the KÃ¶nigsteiner SchlÃ¼ssel, towns are allocated refugees based on population and per head tax revenues: the bigger and richer a town, the more refugees it is obliged to take, for which it is in part supported by state money. This system is crazy, because in big cities there is often a lack of housing, while in Goslar we have the space, said Junk, dressed in jeans, bespectacled and with salt-and-pepper hair. A one-hour drive from Goslar lies GÃ¶ttingen, the regions economic powerhouse. There, officials are struggling to cope with the thousands of refugees it is obliged to house based on its economic strength. As elsewhere in Germany, tent cities and container villages have been springing up overnight to cope with demand. Leisure centres and schools have been converted into shelters, but when the new term starts they will no longer be available, intensifying the problem. And as winter approaches, tent cities will no longer be viable. Its mad that in GÃ¶ttingen they are having to build new accommodation, and are tearing their hair out as to where to put everyone, while we have empty properties and employers who are desperate for skilled workers, Junk said. His appeals for politicians to adopt the Goslar Model have so far fallen on deaf ears. They say to me ˜rules are rules, said Junk. Its typically rigid and German, always having to work with finished concepts rather than allowing for new ideas. Anyone who tells me Germany is full up, or that we cant afford them, I say think of our past, and of the future. Of course we can afford them “ were a rich country, and we have a duty to help those in need. Germanys current generous asylum policy is seen in part as a way of making amends for its Nazi past. And if organised properly, say experts, it would also be a practical way for Germany to deal with the blunt fact that deaths are exceeding births. Despite arson attacks on asylum-seekers homes, and verbal and physical abuse of the refugees themselves, Junk is convinced that Germans are on the whole ready to help. He dismisses the derogatory comments on his Facebook site “ Doesnt Goslar have enough problems of its own?, or Now my tax money is being used to finance foreign criminality “ as belonging to a minority,pointing to the armies of volunteers helping with everything from giving language lessons to newcomers to collecting food and clothing for them. Its not like after the war when inspectors would come and measure your living space, allocating some of it to the ethnic German refugees, and telling you to all squeeze up together, Junk said. No one has to suffer here. On the contrary, if we dont take foreigners we can turn off the lights. Goslar charity worker Uta Liebau supports Junks concept, but knows that getting asylum seekers housed is only the start. Integration is the harder task, she says. Group them all together in a housing block and people will be scared of them, but put them somewhere where they can be your neighbour and you can help them with their shopping, and people start to feel responsible for them. Liebau began working with refugees in the early 1990s during the Balkan wars when she and her radiologist husband, Till, took in a Muslim-Christian family from Bosnia. They lived with us for three years and found work in Goslar. Despite being integrated, well liked, and with a daughter who was the best in her class and spoke fluent German, they were extradited to Bosnia after five years, and I thought then how stupid Germany was. Something of an immigrant herself, having left the communist East for the West in 1979, she sees what is happening now as a new chance for Germany. After years in which the issue of immigration was seen as a threat, were finally recognising their value. Its a way of making up for German history. Three 17-year-old men who arrived from Syria in May quickly took up places at a local secondary school and have become minor celebrities in the town. Bahi, Raman and Abdulmoeen from Aleppo are being upheld by everyone from the local paper to Junk as the role models for the way the town might function in future. They sport fashionable haircuts and wear crisply ironed shirts. They are reluctant to discuss the devastation they left behind and keener to talk about their future in Germany. Were not from here, but the people are treating us as if we were natives, said Bahi in broken German. I could imagine studying here. Though first we need to get our parents out of Syria. Junk hopes they will stay. Its not such a small chance that theyll say, ˜This town has treated me well, Id like to make it my home, he says. It used to be common to hear Germans saying how good it was that Germany had given refugees hope and a future. Its rather more unusual to hear a conservative mayor openly say, as Junk does: In each of these young men and all our refugees, theres a chance for Germany."
"When I speak to refugees from the crisis in Syria, Ill often ask them: What did you take with you? What was that most important thing that you could not leave behind?   The answers vary: one man took a photograph of his wife in happier times. A young girl carried a piece of jewellery worn for celebrations. Hany, a Syrian teen now living in Lebanon, told me he didnt hesitate when fighting came to his neighbourhood and he had to flee. I took my high school diploma, he told me because my life depended on it.   In the Syrian city of Homs, Hany had already risked his life for that piece of  paper. He braved some of the most dangerous streets in Syria just to get to classes. Young male students like him were prime targets for snipers or forced conscription, he told me. Bombs nearly destroyed his brothers school. But when his mother pleaded with him to stay home, he told her simply: All the students are afraid. But we still turn up. His will to learn was far stronger than his fear.  Hany is desperate to continue his education. That diploma is both proof of what he had accomplished and the key to higher learning. He took it with him because he sees it as they key o helping him to emerge from this crisis. If I am not a student,  he once told me. I am nothing. And yet though Hany arrived in Lebanon two years ago, the diploma remains carefully wrapped and unused. He is starting to despair.  We correspond from time to time, and in a recent e-mail he sent this poem, a summary of his state of mind:  I miss myself¦ :-(My friendsTimes of reading novels or writing poemsBird and tea in the morningMy room¦My booksMyselfAnd everything was making me smile...Oh¦ oh !! I had a lot of dreams which were about to be realized¦ More than three million Syrians are now in neighbouring counties, making them the biggest refugee population in the world. It is a population that grows by an average of 100,000 a month. Infrastructures in the areas where they live are already overwhelmed, and served by aid agencies like mine that are underfunded and overstretched.  What worries me most is the fate of the more than one and a half million Syrian refugee children. Far too few are in school. In Lebanon, a country with the largest per capita concentration of refugees in the world, only one in five Syrian refugee children are attending classes. At the secondary level, the number drops to less than 10%.   Efforts to get them there include double shifts at local schools and mass hiring of teachers, but for most children its either too far away or costs too much. Thrown into poverty, many families send their children to work in nearby fields and factories or selling goods on the streets.  And yet refugee children almost always tell us that education is the most important thing in their lives. Why? Because being in school allows them to think of the future, rather than dwelling on the horrors of their past. It gives them a chance to fill their hearts with hope rather than hatred.   When I recently asked a refugee girl named Taif in a tented settlement in Lebanons Bekaa Valley what she had escaped with, she showed me her school text books. Shed read them so many times she had practically committed them to memory.  Unable to enrol in school, she works in the fields picking vegatables for $4 a day. When we gave her a gift of a few books in English, she burst out crying. This was the richest gift she could imagine, she told us.  It is time that we did more for children like Taif. Aid agencies, stretched to the limit, have focused their limited resources on meeting the material needs of fleeing refugees, blankets, food and shelter.   But more needs to be done to cater to the dreams of Syrian children as well. We need massive investment to help them to continue with their schooling. Refugees, after all, have the greatest stake in rebuilding their war-ravaged country.   They can stop the cycle of violence. They can put their country back on its feet. And if equipped to do so, they could become agents of change, reconciliation and social transformation.   How about thinking of refugee camps and settlements as more than just temporary population centres where people wait for the war to end? Should we not, instead, consider them places of excellence where refugees can triumph over their trauma, contribute to their communities and train for their return home?   For Hany, once destined to be an engineer, university is becoming a distant dream. Left to languish, he will become a member of a lost generation. A generation of uneducated, unskilled and dangerously frustrated kids. Is this the future of Syria the world wants? Melissa Fleming is head of communications for the UNs high commissioner for refugees. Watch her TED talk here."
"This week a regional certification commission is expected to declare the World Health Organisation south-east Asia region polio-free. I could not be prouder about this historic achievement.People of a certain age will still remember the fear caused by the polio epidemics of the early 1950s, when this infectious viral disease sickened and paralysed as many as 8,000 children in the UK each year. But many Britons my age and younger won't know much, if anything, about polio. By the mid to late 1950s, effective vaccines were in wide use, and within two decades or so polio was gone from most of the developed world.My situation, however, was somewhat different in that my parents came from India, where I lived for two years as a young girl. One of the things I remember, during my daily walk to school in Mumbai, was seeing other children crawling in the streets, their legs withered and deformed. Those troubling images stayed with me for years. Eventually, I learned that the children were victims of polio, which until very recently was regarded as a grim fact of life in India, where a combination of conditions “ polluted water, poor sanitation, extreme poverty and a very dense population “ allowed the disease to flourish.Then in January, something akin to a public health miracle occurred: India completed three full years without a new case of polio, proving that the virus had finally been stopped within its borders. India was the last of the 11 countries in south-east Asia to beat the disease, setting the stage for the region's polio-free certification this month.Since 2011, I have been a polio eradication ambassador for the humanitarian organisation Rotary International, one of the founding partners in the Global Polio Eradication Initiative, which since 1988 has been working to reach the world's children with the oral polio vaccine. My task is to raise awareness and to emphasise the importance of wiping out polio for good.I am happy to report that today polio is 99% gone, down from about 350,000 cases a year in the 1980s to barely 400 in 2013. With India now free of the disease, only three countries remain polio-endemic: Nigeria, Afghanistan and Pakistan. We must ramp up our efforts in the endemic countries, because from them polio can re-emerge to infect children in places where it had been stopped, such as we saw last year in Syria and the Horn of Africa. If we were to relax our guard “ decide, say, that the world could live with a few hundred polio cases a year and cease our mass vaccinations in at-risk countries “ experts tell us polio could rebound with a vengeance, infecting thousands of children a year.That means we must keep the pressure on our political, business and philanthropic leaders to generate the resources to finish the job. As a British citizen, I am proud that the UK's commitment to polio eradication to date now totals more than $1.2bn, and I strongly urge our government to continue to lead by example. The Indian government likewise has spent $1.3bn to protect the nation's children from polio.Since my personal involvement began, I have learned a great deal about polio eradication, and “ due to my strong ties to my parents' homeland “ I have followed the campaign in India very closely. Last year, I went to New Delhi, where I visited polio survivors who have benefited from corrective surgeries paid for by Indian Rotary clubs. I visited a health clinic, where parents brought their babies “ and older children brought little brothers and sisters “ to be vaccinated against polio. The most emotional moment came when I immunised a child, placing two drops of polio vaccine into her tiny mouth. I realised that the little one in my arms would never, ever suffer from this terrible disease. It was a transformative experience that brought the entire issue into crisp focus. It truly is about reaching one child at a time.¢ EndPolioNow.org"
"The immigration minister says specialist training undertaken by customs counter-terrorism officers will prevent innocent people being detained arbitrarily at airports as a result of the Abbott governments enhanced national security measures. Scott Morrison used a speech at the National Press Club on Wednesday to declare the government must stop the terrorists “ and he provided some additional details of legislative measures intended to allow successful prosecutions of foreign fighters expected to be introduced to federal parliament this month. Asked what safeguards the government proposed to put in place to ensure that only persons of interest were detained at Australian airports in an environment of heightened national security risk, Morrison replied the relevant safeguard was the exceptional training undertaken by Australian customs officers. Our officers are exceptionally well trained, he said.  Late last year the convicted terrorist Khaled Sharrouf departed Australia for the conflict in Syria using his brothers passport. A picture was later posted on social media and reprinted by news outlets in Australia and elsewhere of a young boy, reported to be Sharroufs son, clutching the severed head of a Syrian soldier. Morrison addressed that apparent security lapse during his appearance at the press club. He acknowledged that the screening settings that applied last December needed to be changed. The minister said the Coalition had now moved to adjust airport procedures and had increased resources to the tune of $150m. Despite the implicit concession, the immigration minister continued to contend it was Labors fault for depriving the customs system of resources, and for not adjusting the security screening settings “ even though Sharrouf absconded in December 2013, when the Coalition was in government. Morrison outlined an expansion of advance passenger processing and the airline liaison officer network “ measures building on an expansion of counter-terrorism capacity at big Australian airports. He also provided some additional details about the legislative package the Abbott government proposes to introduce in a fortnight. The minister said the looming foreign fighters package would address shortcomings in the Customs Act when it came to detaining persons of interest. It would also contain changes to the Migration Act to better support the use and retention of information captured from automated border processing technology and requiring carriers to provide information in advance on departing travellers through an approved reporting system. The package would also provide the Asio director general with the power to issue an interim prejudicial security assessment. This measure would allow peoples passports to be cancelled. Morrison acknowledged there was now a gap in the legal framework when it came to both the detention of persons of interest and the successful prosecution of people engaged in jihadi activities overseas. He provided a specific example concerning airport detention. Customs officers, he said, now had a very narrow window of opportunity for detaining people and inviting other agencies to conduct investigations “ and this was something the government would need to address. The immigration minister noted that Australians were, intrinsically, easygoing people. We like to think we are a long way from all the trouble spots of the world but as the world grows smaller, then obviously the threats that can present from other places can have a much greater impact here, he said. Morrison said the clear signal on Tuesday night from the director general of Asio, David Irvine, that Australias terrorism threat level would shortly be adjusted upwards “ for the first time since 2003 “ underscored the tangible and present nature of the threat. These threats were not imagined, made up, [they are] real. The threat alert is now set at medium. This setting signifies that a domestic terrorist incident is possible. A high alert means a domestic attack is likely. The Labor leader, Bill Shorten, was asked on Wednesday morning about the looming change in Australias threat alert level. He told reporters Labor had sought a briefing on Irvines comments on Tuesday evening. Shorten paid tribute to Irvine, who retires at the end of the week. On the threat level, the Labor leader said the opposition would await concrete developments. I think its important on one hand not to be complacent but on the other hand not to scare people unnecessarily. Ill wait until our security agencies form a view about the need to change our threat levels before commenting."
"Iraqi officials say they expect tens of thousands more civilians to leave Falluja and Ramadi in the coming days, increasing the biggest exodus from the two cities since the height of the sectarian war in 2006.The United Nations high commission for refugees (UNHCR) said on Friday that 65,000 had left the cities in the past week alone, as militants linked to al-Qaida continue to defy demands to leave from tribal figures and the Iraqi army. Iraq claims 140,000 have left since renewed fighting began in December.The standoff, now into its second month, shows no sign of being defused. Iraq's prime minister Nouri al-Maliki has insisted he is prepared to order an attack to dislodge the resurgent al-Qaida groups who are trying to reclaim Anbar province as a heartland of operations.However, unlike the insurgency of 2004-2008 that was eventually pushed back by tribal leaders and the occupying US military, the new al-Qaida push is spilling beyond Iraq's borders into Syria, where its fighters are also playing prominent roles in the civil war.The al-Qaida group, known as the Islamic State of Iraq in Syria (Isis) now has a footprint across much of northeast Syria, the eastern deserts that spill into Iraq and Falluja and Ramadi, which are only 30-50 miles west of the capital, Baghdad.Isis's entry into the two cities has also alarmed the US, coming less than 10 years after its military led two large-scale attempts to oust al-Qaida militants in 2004. As the US was preparing to leave Iraq, several army commanders claimed that the foe, which had cost them roughly one third of their battle casualties, had been ""strategically defeated"".Now a revitalised Isis is drawing renewed attention from the US, which withdrew from the country in late 2011. Responding to pleas from Iraq, Washington has sent heavy weapons and surveillance drones to Baghdad. The speaker of Iraq's parliament, Osama al-Nujaifi, was in Washington on Thursday adding his voice to pleas for help in defeating the insurgency.Nujaifi, the most senior Sunni Arab in the Iraqi government, said Barack Obama and vice-president Joe Biden had agreed to send direct support to the Sunni tribes, whose leaders had led the Awakening movement that stabilised the province throughout 2007.The UNHCR said several neighbourhoods remain trapped and cut off from supplies in both cities. Isis is occupying large swaths of Ramadi and the centre of Falluja. The Iraqi army has partly encircled both urban areas, but has not yet launched anything more than small-scale forays into parts of Ramadi.More than a million people were displaced at the height of Iraq's sectarian war.The past six months have been the deadliest across the country since mid-2008, with monthly death tolls tracking upwards and bomb attacks, mainly aimed at Shia communities or government targets, now at their highest levels in at least six years."
"On 10 June, the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (Isis), the group whose dramatic advances have startled the world over the past 72 hours, posted a photograph of their fighters demolishing barriers marking the dividing line between Syria and Iraq. They were, they claimed, ""smashing the Sykes-Picot border"". This was a reference to the British diplomat Sir Mark Sykes and his French counterpart, FranÃ§ois Georges-Picot who, in May 1916, concluded secret negotiations to divide the Middle East into French and British zones of imperial influence.Isis's symbolic destruction of the border was an attempt to give credence to its claim to be sweeping away the false states created by the nefarious European powers, uniting all Muslims in one pious&nbsp;community. Somewhat more surprisingly, this radical attempt at political engineering has also found sympathy among policy pundits in Europe and the United States who are looking for instant solutions to the long-term problems that are destabilising the countries of the region. Iraq and Syria, they argue, are prefabricated states that have never gained the loyalty of their populations. Popular political legitimacy will only be found in smaller, more religiously and ethnically homogenous units that mirror the provinces used by the Ottoman empire to administer the region before 1914.This assertion, made by both Isis and western commentators, is historically and sociologically illiterate. This week Isis, an organisation whose active membership is numbered in the low thousands, has not only asserted its control over Mosul, Iraq's second city, but routed an Iraqi army garrison many times larger, stealing advanced weaponry and Iraqi dinars worth hundreds of millions of dollars. The worrying speed with which it then moved its forces towards Baghdad has been used as evidence of Iraq's artificiality and the divided nature of its population. The truth, however, is more complex but less pessimistic.Isis “ and its forerunner, al-Qaida in Iraq “ has long had a strong presence in Mosul, exploiting the chaos and lawlessness triggered by the US invasion in 2003. Early this year Isis expanded its control over Mosul, murdering local&nbsp;government officials and extracting an estimated $8m a month from protection rackets. However, its expansion from Mosul into other towns&nbsp;and cities in northern Iraq has much more to do with the profound failures of the Iraqi government and the legacy of invasion than the historical artificiality of the Iraqi state.Iraq's present prime minister, Nouri al-Maliki, first came to power in April 2006 in a deal brokered by the then British foreign secretary, Jack Straw, and the American secretary of state, Condoleezza Rice. Maliki's ascendancy was an Anglo-American attempt to create a facade of democracy in the midst of a vicious post-invasion civil war. After 2006 Maliki used his power to rule in an authoritarian way, deploying a compliant judiciary and a million-strong security force to break the opposition. The national elections of 2010 put his rule in question. Iraqiyya, a nationwide coalition running on an avowedly secular and nationalist platform, won 91 seats in parliament compared with Maliki's 89.Ironically, both the US and Iran backed the continuation of Maliki's rule “ even though he lost the elections “ in the name of predictability and order. A government of national unity was&nbsp;formed, with Iraqiyya being given&nbsp;the ministry of finance as a consolation prize. From 2010 onwards Maliki set out&nbsp;to break Iraqiyya's electoral popularity. In 2013 he drove the&nbsp;popular and effective Iraqiyya finance minister, Rafi al-Issawi, from&nbsp;the&nbsp;cabinet on trumped-up terrorism charges. This caused mass demonstrations across north-west Iraq, driven by a population who have come to see the post-2003 Iraqi state and its army as predatory, set on breaking them politically and marginalising them&nbsp;economically.It is this failure to build a sustainable and inclusive political system after regime change in 2003 and the authoritarianism of Maliki, America's candidate for prime minister, that explains the rise of Isis and current crisis, not the state's supposedly ""false"" creation.Faced with an angry and alienated population and a violent Islamist insurgency, what is the US administration proposing to do? President Obama recognised earlier this week that Iraq is ""going to need more help from us, and it's going to need more help from the international community"". He went on to say he had ruled nothing out in terms of American support for Iraq. On Friday, however, he added ""The United States is not simply going involve itself in a military action in the absence of a political plan by the Iraqis that gives us some assurance that they are prepared to work together"". It is clear that the Obama administration is focused on supplying military support to Maliki, not demanding that he leave power or radically change his approach to ruling the country.However, simply giving even more weapons to the Iraqi army won't solve this profound crisis. The more drastic solution of breaking up the Iraqi state “ an institution that has since 1920 become the focus of a robust nationalist identity for the vast majority of ordinary Iraqis “ would also not deliver stability.Instead, the US and the international&nbsp;community should be encouraging Iraqis to reform their own&nbsp;political institutions. Political parties campaigning for financial probity, citizenship and equal rights should be encouraged “ not those, like Maliki's, pursuing overtly sectarian agendas. It was the hubristic invasion of 2003, with its failed plans for radical social engineering that has led to the present crisis “ not the Iraqi state. Those&nbsp;who want to see a stable, democratic Iraq should support the heroic people within the country who are still there, trying to build a new country from the&nbsp;ground up. "
"Propaganda operatives from Islamic State (Isis) are piggybacking on popular internet hashtags and forums to secure the widest distribution of their videos, in an increasingly devious game of cat and mouse with police and internet companies, the Guardian can reveal. An analysis of one of the most recent Isis video distributions shows the variety of techniques being used “ including latching on to the huge interest in the Scottish independence referendum “ to boost distribution of their extremist material on Twitter and YouTube. The sophisticated strategies have prompted law enforcement agencies to work closer than ever with the worlds largest tech and social media companies to try to win the propaganda war. A specialist British police squad is working with companies including Twitter and YouTube to block and delete about 1,100 pieces of gruesome content a week, which they say contravene UK terror laws. The vast majority of the material “ 800 items a week “ relate to Syria and Iraq. Officers from the UKs counter-terrorism internet referral unit (CTIRU) acknowledge they are up against a slick and fast-moving dissemination of propaganda and much of the counter-attack involves suspending Twitter accounts or taking down videos of murder, torture, combat scenes, sniper attacks and suicide missions. Last week provided a good example of what they are up against. One of Isiss media production units, al-Furqan, released its first video in what it described as a series of programmes, showing the kidnapped British photojournalist John Cantlie wearing an orange jumpsuit and addressing multiple cameras from behind a desk. Al-Furqan is also responsible for videos of Cantlies fellow captives, James Foley, Steven Sotloff and David Haines, whose grisly executions were all filmed and broadcast on the internet. On Tuesday, the group released a second video of Cantlie within hours of US bombing raids on Isis territory in Iraq and Syria. Using little-known content uploading services, anonymous text-pasting sites and multiple backup Twitter accounts, a select group of Isis operatives managed to evade administrators controls to spread the Cantlie video, titled Lend Me Your Ears, around the web within a few hours. In the minutes before its launch, operatives issued tweets giving supporters a signal that something was about to be released. One account using the handle @with_baghdadi advised having at least two backup accounts in case of suspension and added: Are you ready? While being uploaded to YouTube, links to the film were also put on the justpaste.it service. Run by a 26-year-old Polish graduate, the site has become a vital part of the Isis publicity machine because it allows users to post pictures and text anonymously. From there, people could go on to download Cantlies video message from three other websites, gulfup.com, sendspace.com and directmirror.com after typing in a long password chain, also provided by Isis members on the justpaste.it page. Jihadi groups have realised they must reach a certain level of distribution very quickly. If their content is not spread in time and deposited in hundreds of places, they know they can be more easily controlled by staff at Twitter and YouTube. Another propaganda operative called Abdulrahman al-Hamid asked his 4,000 followers on Twitter for the highest trending topics in the UK and popular account names they could jump on to get the required uplift. Writing in Arabic under the now-suspended handle @Abu_Laila, he wrote: We need those who can supply us with the most active hashtags in the UK. And also the accounts of the most famous celebrities. I believe that the hashtag of Scotlands separation from Britain should be the first. Replies from followers advised using #andymurray, #scotland, #scotlandindependence, #VoteNo and #VoteYes and linking to David Camerons twitter handle. Please work hard to publish all the links, Hamid urged. At the same time @With_baghdadi told Isis supporters to invade the #voteno hashtags with the video of the british prisoner. Another Isis operative, Abu Omar al-Fateh, goaded YouTube administrators: YouTube has started to delete some of the links for the new video. Wed like to tell you YouTube administrators that we will send you a new batch of links soon! In an online battle of wits, CTIRU is actively seeking out extremist material and also asking members of the public to refer any material that concerns them. Last year, the unit instigated the removal of more than 45,000 pieces of material. YouTube, which is owned by Google, has given a number of government agencies trusted flagger status to prioritise their reporting of dangerous or illegal material. Twitter is not believed to have developed any official fast-track process but reporting from recognised law enforcement accounts are understood to be dealt with more seriously. During a Lords committee hearing in July, Twitters SinÃ©ad McSweeney said it had in excess of 100 people working 24/7 to examine reports across a range of issues. During the same hearing, Facebooks Simon Milner said the companys safety team in Dublin was consumed by dealing with content emanating from the Syrian civil war. A spokeswoman said the police had good working relationships with the relevant internet companies but where necessary would also use appropriate legislation in a host country in order to counter the spread of violent messages and videos.     The hashtag: a new symbol of terror? Photograph: Alamy    Counter-measures by police and security agencies appear to be having an impact. Following another of the increasingly frequent purges of scores of jihadi accounts by Twitter last week, Hamid described the action as a disaster. Tweeting on 14 September, he said: We talked a lot about the deletion of accounts and the means of staying steadfast and to push people to continue if their accounts were deleted or suspended ¦ We have to admit that this is a disaster and we have to be patient. During the operation to get the Cantlie video trending, Hamid admonished his followers for being afraid of having their accounts terminated. The one who is worried about his account [being suspended] I say to him, ˜I swear to god there are other people willing to sacrifice themselves for their religion ¦ You should be ashamed of yourself that your account might be attacked even 10 times. Responding to Guardian questions, Fateh, who was congratulated online for uploading the Cantlie video 10 times on YouTube, refused to go into details about al-Furqans methods. Speaking via Twitter, he added that al-Furqan staff had long years of experience. He did not confirm or deny he was part of the group. In some cases, Twitter staff appear to be suspending backup accounts as soon as they are activated, even though the new accounts have not breached rules in any obvious way. One account run by Rayat al-Tawheed, who speaks on behalf of mainly UK-origin pro-Isis fighters, had a replacement account taken down by Twitter within just a few minutes of its relaunch last Tuesday. By that point it had only issued three non-offensive tweets. A source within the social media industry said there was a danger that relying on a policy of making content disappear would fail to tackle the rhetoric from global jihadis. Just closing down an account doesnt address the underlying narrative, they said. Twitter declined to reveal specific details about its operation publicly, saying: We review all reported accounts against our rules, which prohibit unlawful use and violent threats.     Police and security agencies are in an online game of cat and mouse with Isis.  Photograph: Osman Orsal/Reuters  "
"The murder of the journalist James Foley is sickening. As his grieving parents said, this courageous man had his life terminated for trying to expose the suffering of the Syrian people. And among those causing that awful pain and devastation, as in Iraq, are the very same bunch of zealots who carried out his barbaric slaying. Yet however callous, however cruel, however utterly contemptible, the beheading was far from senseless for the Islamic State jihadists. Such well-publicised savagery produces the panic that makes fearful infidels flee their advance, as I saw these past 10 days in Iraqi Kurdistan. What other group could empty a refugee camp packed with Christians in less than an hour, or a sizeable Yazidi town on a Sunday morning? This fear factor helps a comparatively small force “ perhaps just 25,000 strong “ to conquer and control a slab of land the size of Britain. The killing highlights the groups skilled use of social media to spread their warped message “ such a strange but effective fusion of medieval beliefs and modern technology. I clicked on the video following a link from Twitter, then cursed myself and turned off the computer. We do not need to see those dreadful images to appreciate the disgusting nature of the deed; they offer only a voyeuristic glimpse into the corrosive and often-choreographed pornography of conflict in our age. Watch them, and you demean the legacy of a brave reporter. Last week I spoke with an Islamic State official, a man inflicting his corrupted religious beliefs on hundreds of kidnapped Yazidi women and children. He calmly explained his organisations aims: to drive non-Muslims out of its self-declared caliphate and fight the US because it was using Arab rulers to attack them. He was polite, refusing only to discuss the foreign fighters thought to make up one-third of their forces, but chilling as he discussed the sale of women as slaves and the theft of children for conversion. The key question is how to defeat such frightening fanaticism. This is a group that alarmed even al-Qaida, exploiting the Syrian civil war and sectarian rule of Iraq to amass arms, wealth and influence at immense speed. It is thought 500 Yazidi people were slaughtered in response to the first US air raids. Clearly the aim of this latest outrage “ combined with the threat to kill another of the 20-odd journalists who have disappeared in Syria “ is to terrify and goad the west. The beheading of an American reporter, apparently by a British jihadist, is horrific. It is also a deliberate provocation. Foley would have been among the first to remind us that there have been many more deaths in this bloodstained and increasingly divided part of the world. It was disturbing to hear repeated claims from refugees of Arabs turning so rapidly on Christian and Yazidi neighbours, readily joining jihadists in carrying out atrocities in their towns and villages. Similar forces can be seen in west Africa and elsewhere. Tragically, it appears that the kaleidoscope of cultures in the Middle East has been so badly shaken it may be broken for ever. Britain and the US bear some responsibility; such was the arrogance that when George Bush and his senior advisers pushing the 2003 war first met with Iraqi exiles, much of the time was spent explaining the difference between Shia and Sunni Muslims “ and that both were found in Iraq. But given the extreme nature of todays crisis, both sides of this debate need to stop fighting past battles. We must accept our own impotence. Western nations should offer sanctuary to many of those devastated refugees and collectively ban for life the return of any young fools joining the jihad. But we cannot solve this explosion of complex economic, social and political issues “ let alone heal religious fissures dating back centuries. This is not to advocate isolationism, merely to suggest any fresh interventions are laced with realism. Yes, it makes sense to use western special forces on the ground, not least to shore up the beleaguered Kurds whose accidental state is the one beneficial thing to have emerged from recent incursions. But we must banish for ever the idea that we can impose simplistic solutions. Britain should reflect on foreign policies that seem more confused by the day, sending out conflicting messages exploited easily by extremists. So we support democrats in one place, yet despots next door: we look at banning a party that won an election in Egypt, and back a repressive general who mounts a coup; we back Israel regardless of its lethally disproportionate response to rocket attacks; and we arm a feudal regime in Saudi Arabia that exported religious extremism around the globe with devastating consequences. It is even reported that our own allies aided the funding of Islamic State. One thing is clear from this latest evil act: the connected nature of a planet in which a possibly British man beheads an American journalist to advance religious insurgency in the Middle East, and the video is posted online. The idiocy of those who claim they have all the answers is equal only to the stupidity of those who think we can ignore global problems. James Foley risked his life to try to explain such complexities."
"In a timely nod to the season of gunpowder, treason and plot, foreign secretary Philip Hammond has proposed reviving the dormant 1351 Treason Act for British jihadis who swear allegiance to Islamic State (Isis). Backing him on Radio 2s Jeremy Vine show, Tory MP Philip Hollobone said that the crime of treason requires special treatment because it is worse than murder, more or less word for word the tagline on my Tudor crime novel, Treachery. Theres no statement yet on whether Hammond wants to reinstate a scaffold at Tyburn for the purposes of hanging, drawing and quartering traitors, though high treason stillofficially carried the death penalty until 1998. Despite the swashbuckling resonance of high treason, Hammond has a clear precedent in applying it to religious extremists perceived to pose a threat to national security. It was the Tudors who really got creative with the definition of treason. Henry VIII used it as groundsto execute wives he accused of infidelity and their lovers, and also introduced religious nonconformity into the issue by condemning monks who refused to accept his supremacy to a traitors death. In the 1580s, Elizabeth Is government faced a growing problem of underground religious cells “ disenfranchised young men, often converted or radicalised at university, travelling overseas to religious training schools before returning to England on what they thought of as martyrdom missions (they called England deaths waiting-room). These young men were Catholic priests whose intentions were, for the most part, benign: to offer Catholic rites to those denied the freedom to practise their religion openly, while converting a few more souls along the way. While a tiny minority gambled with the idea of assassinating the Queen, the greater fear among her councillors was that religious loyalty, in this case to Rome, would always outweigh loyalty to queen and country. In the event of an invasion by the European Catholic powers, English Catholics allegiance would be to a higher power rather than to England. Perhaps this same fear lies behind Hammonds desire to cry treason; too many citizens whose first loyalty is to a religious cause that supersedes national identity is a terrifying prospect for any government. But Elizabeth did not want to be seen persecuting people for their religion for fear of losing popularity and winning further sympathy for their cause; the increasingly punitive legislation passed against missionary priests made it clear that they were not being punished for their beliefs, but for turning people away from their loyalty to the Queen. They were not executed as heretics by burning, but by hanging, drawing and quartering, the penalty for the political offence of treason. Nobody was fooled. The missionary priests who were disembowelled became martyrs and, far from deterring would-be missionaries, their deaths only inspired more. In the same way, tempting as it is to find some enhanced way of expressing how abhorrent we find the actions of a British man killing fellow Britons in the name of an imagined religious state, to grant these actions a special status, above and of greater significance than mere terrorism or murder, is to accord the terrorists a grandeur that serves their own view of their mission. Hammond should save treason for bonfire night, and treat the jihadis as the murderers they are. Stephanie Merritts latest book, writing as SJ Parris, is Treachery, published by HarperCollins"
"On Sunday, Republican Senators John McCain and Lindsay Graham blasted the Obama administration for the return of al-Qaida to Iraq, arguing that the withdrawal of US troops in 2011 created a power vacuum that would be ""filled with America's enemies"". They claim that if the US had maintained even a small military presence in Iraq, al-Qaida would never have gained a foothold in the western regions of Iraq and reclaimed Fallujah. It is Obama's abdication of leadership, in their tired Churchillian worldview, that produced the chaos in Iraq today.This argument reflects a gross simplification of the problem that Iraq currently faces. The resurgence of al-Qaida in Iraq is a product of two dynamics, neither of which is a direct consequence of the absence of US troops. First, al-Qaida in Iraq has been rescued from near strategic collapse by the progress of Syria's brutal civil war. As the war dragged on, the inchoate rebel opposition to Bashar al-Assad has become increasingly led by the jihadi forces sympathetic to the general worldview of al-Qaida.In the eastern regions of Syria, one of these prominent jihadi forces, the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (Isis), has become an incubator of terrorist violence within Iraq, sending dozens of suicide bombers into the country and turning the entire cross-border region into a battlefield. Its goal is to spread the war across borders, in the hopes of creating a greater sectarian Sunni state comprised of parts of Iraq and Syria.Due to their activities, 2013 was among the bloodiest years on record for Iraq, with 8,868 Iraqis (including both civilians and security forces) killed in that year alone. If Syria had not collapsed into chaos and civil war “ a fact unrelated to the number of US troops on bases in a neighboring state “ it is unlikely that al-Qaida would have mounted such a comeback.The terrorist group would have remained a residual force in Iraq, capable of gruesome attacks, but incapable of threatening to grab control of Iraqi territory.Second, the return of al-Qaida is a direct function of the increasing authoritarianism of Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki's government and his short-sighted marginalization of the Sunnis. While Maliki has always been a sectarian figure with suspected links to Iran, his authoritarian streak has only gotten worse in recent years, as he has regularly charged critics of the government, including prominent officials, with terrorism. The recent crisis was generated by the arrest of prominent Iraqi parliamentarian Ahmed al-Alwani on terrorism charges. Iraqi security forces stormed the home of Alwani, who was known for backing Sunni anti-government protests, in a bloody incident which killed six people, including his brother.   The problem with this attempted arrest “ and dozens before this, including former Vice President Tariq al-Hashemi “ is that they represent an effort by Maliki to use the charge of ""terrorism"" to eliminate his enemies. Over time, successive arrests of critics of the government, and the heavy-handed behavior of the Shia-dominated security forces, has inflamed sectarian tensions and convinced more of the Sunnis to see the Maliki regime as a hostile force. Maliki has hardly helped matters by ignoring or repressing protests against his government's policies. This pattern of politicized arrests has reinforced the sense of political marginalization among Sunnis, and provided an opportunity for al-Qaida to re-establish itself in those regions as a champion of their cause.The question that McCain and Graham raise is whether a US troop presence would have restrained Maliki and prevented the Sunnis from becoming as disenfranchised as they are today. The evidence does not support this argument: Maliki's authoritarian streak was in evidence before US withdrawal in 2011, and there is no evidence that a token presence of trainers and Special Forces would have conveyed any additional leverage to American officials in their dealing with Maliki. It is more likely that a larger US presence in Iraq would have been seen by Sunnis as an attempt to backstop a Shia dominated government hostile to their interests. With only a small number of troops present, the US would have been a bystander to Iraq's authoritarian drift and may have been implicated in this new sectarian contest as the underwriter of Maliki's power.   Moreover, the argument that McCain and Graham offer overlooks one basic fact: that in an occupation, the occupier is often so dependent on the local government that it can extract little, if anything, when dealing with them. For an example of this dynamic, one must only look at US efforts to get Hamid Karzai to say yes to anything it wants in Afghanistan. After 12 years of fighting, and trillions wasted in that country, it is obvious to everyone but McCain and Graham that the US is more dependent on Karzai than he is on them. Missing this point “ and rehashing fantasies in which every war is America's to win, and no occupation can ever end “ is an indulgence that the US can no longer afford.  The Obama administration (most notably Secretary of State John Kerry) is right to refuse to deploy ground troops in this new round of fighting against al-Qaida. This is a multi-faceted, cross-border war with militias fighting on both sides; it is ultimately the job of the Iraqi government to defeat al-Qaida and to restore its legitimacy. If Washington wants to help, it should not rush into offering weapons and intelligence to the Iraqi government without extracting a promise from Maliki to end his misguided repression of Sunni critics, and to accommodate the legitimate demands of the Sunni population."
"We are at a good moment in history, says Justin Forsyth, chief executive of Save the Children UK. We live in a time where we can really make change. This has been Forsyths mantra since he arrived at the charity in 2010. Under his watch the once uncontroversial Save the Children has become a marmite charity, powerfully dividing opinion in the NGO world, and meanwhile becoming larger and more powerful by the day. Has Save the Children become too large and lost sight of what it is for?    Related: Save the Children head apologises for upset over award to Tony Blair    Save the Childrens many critics bemoan the organisations size “ with an annual budget of $1.6bn, a global staff of 14,000 and operations in 120 countries it is now one of the biggest global charities, and its recent absorption of NGO Merlin (Medical Emergency Relief International) smacked to some of quasi-corporate ambitions. Save the Childrens partnerships with the private sector have also been criticised as have its use of emotive images in advertising campaigns; those poor, big-eyed, sad-looking black kids you see on the tube as one charity worker puts it.  But on the other side the charitys supporters point to figures showing that it has almost doubled the number of children it helps from eight million to 15.4 million since Forsyth took office five years ago. As Jasmine Whitbread, CEO of Save the Children International, once said: Its a business where our bottom line is childrens lives.  Under Forsyths watch, Save the Children UK has established corporate partnerships with GlaxoSmithKline (GSK), Unilever, and Pearson, while the US branch of the charity has struck deals with Nike, Walmart and Goldman Sachs. Forsyth himself is a man of quiet contradictions, a man who went from marching against the Iraq war to working as an adviser for Tony Blair, from campaigning against GSK to describing the company, who Save the Children now has a Â£15m partnership deal with, as one that wants to make a difference.   Related: Save the Children CEO: It's time for better charity fundraising regulation    You might laugh but I saw Andrew Witty, the head of GSK, the other day and he wants to transform the company. He feels that GSK is a vehicle for addressing inequality in health and addressing the bottom of that pyramid, he says.  Thats why theyre working on malaria, Ebola, pneumonia products. Obviously theres a business case, but that company also believes the heart of their values is to do good in the world. I would say that a lot of companies arent in that position. We want to work with the ones that definitely want to make a difference in the world. Two more Save the Children US partners, Nike and Walmart, have been dogged by allegations of child labour in recent years, an undercover report by CBS News in 2013 found widespread use of the practice in Walmarts Bangladesh supplier. Forsyth says all decisions on corporate partnerships are made by a board-level committee which signs off the companies that we work with. He adds: Nike has a very progressive policy on child labour. Whether it is already implemented in the right way is another question, and thats the same with other companies. Were not going to only work with companies that are perfect, but well work with ones that are going in the right direction.  At the time the CBS News story broke Walmart told the broadcaster it would investigate all the findings and end its relationship with the clothing supplier named in the report if incidences of child labour were found. A former adviser to Tony Blair, Forsyth displays a lot of the characteristics of his old boss. He seems able to organise his opinions in a way that doesnt fit a traditional ideology, frequently extolling the virtues of the private sector, while at the same time praising his charity for speaking truth to power. In particular, hes keen to draw attention to the action taken on the Gaza conflict, which saw Save the Children put together a project naming all the children killed in last summers war.     Were not going to only work with companies that are perfect. We work with ones that are going in the right direction.  Justin Forsyth     There have been embarrassing moments, such as the decision by Save the Children US to award the former prime minister a global legacy award for his work on poverty in Africa which drew widespread condemnation. In March, Forsyth was forced to admit the award had damaged his organisations credibility, after 500 members of staff signed an internal letter calling the decision morally reprehensible. Today, he insists he had little to do with the decision. Ive apologised to the people I upset over this. We were so busy at the time. We were overwhelmed with Syria and Ebola, and I just passed it over in my email to send it to Tonys office. I didnt register it. My political antennae should have been out and I should have cautioned the staff about it, he says. But despite his remorse, he admits he was surprised by the publics reaction to the award. There wasnt a reaction anywhere else in the world. It was only in the UK. We didnt get any reaction in the US, and this was a Save the Children US event, he explains.  Most people would accept that Blair, with Gordon Brown, did a lot in the 2000s to make a massive difference on development. I think I had forgotten how toxic Blair has become in some peoples eyes. I thought this was a reward for the work he had done in Africa. Ive travelled with Tony Blair to Africa and hes treated with tremendous acclaim. Then there are those advertising campaigns, so loathed by rival charities and mocked by campaigns like Radi-Aid.     Justin Forsyth (second left) sits next to Tony Blair during his days working for the Labour prime minister in 2006. Photograph: Carl de Souza/AFP/WPA/PA    Codes have even been drawn up to stop the sad, black kid photos proliferating in fundraising efforts. In April 1989, the General Assembly of European NGOs set guidelines for NGOs to refrain from using apocalyptic or pathetic images, which foster a sense of Northern superiority. This code was reaffirmed in 2007, but critics say large NGOs like Save the Children have been able to largely ignore the guidelines. Forsyth says Save the Children have its own very strong and robust guidelines on images that have been updated after external consultaion over the the last year. The number one priority is the safeguarding of children, he says.  From his position near the top of the global development tree, Forsyth seems reluctant to make his presence too keenly felt. He stops short of lecturing other NGOs in our discussion, but is still keen to set out his vision. I think the world has dramatically changed and Bill Gates is right that weve made this unbelievable progress that give us an historic opportunity to end some things on our lifetime, he says at one point. If we can reinvent ourselves, if we can think about achieving more, we have an unbelievable opportunity. If we did what Save the Children did 10 years ago, we wouldnt be having that kind of impact.  The problem with NGOs is that there is a danger of living in a politically correct and very narrow world and having less impact, rather than looking at ways of having an innovative impact. But were not throwing out our values in the process.  Join our community of development professionals and humanitarians. Follow @GuardianGDP on Twitter."
"  6.04pm BST    Afternoon summary     Nick Clegg has said that the Lib Dem vote on Gatwick doesnt make sense and that, although he will respect it, the party will at some point have to debate the issue again. He has been doing a round of TV interviews and, when asked about the vote, he told ITV:   The Liberal Democrats is a democratic party ... its not a sort of North Korean sect that does exactly what the leader wants. My personal view is that the position that was debated and agreed upon today, I dont think it makes sense. I just dont think it makes sense to say youre never going to have a single metre of extra concrete anywhere, in any runway anywhere in the United Kingdom. But I lead a political party that quite rightly is very punctilious about its internal democracy. The argument I and others made has not won the day.  But it will need to be discussed again because, how can I put it, Ive seen the perils of the past of putting something which you know in your heart of hearts is not necessarily deliverable.   Clegg has revealed that the Liberal Democrats would raise capital gains tax for the wealthiest in order to pay for an increase in the personal allowance to Â£11,000 in the first year of a new parliament.   Sir Menzies Campbell, the former Lib Dem leader, has said he would like parliament to authorise air strikes against Islamic State (Isis) in Syria. He made the point in an emergency debate on the Middle East.   Speaking for myself and myself alone, I do not believe our continuing non-participation can be justified on anything other than political grounds. Likewise, I believe any such political grounds are outweighed by the threat of massive ethnic and religious cleansing. In Kobani the Kurds are facing an uphill struggle against Isis which if they lose will unleash indescribable consequences on its inhabitants.  I dont apologise for striking a sombre note in this manner. We can look forward to murder, ritual humiliation, slavery, rape and attacks, savage attacks, upon the rights of women, sold as brides and sometimes as sex slaves as well. Be in no doubt of any kind whatsoever, if Kobani falls then there will be slaughter on an apocalyptic scale.  If there is anything we can do to prevent that then surely this is the time to do it. Can there ever be a more compelling case for humanitarian intervention? I doubt not.   Clegg has said that he is not going to remain in politics forever.   I think there are other things to do in life, and Im thankfully not one of those people whos so obsessed with politics that I want to be in politics forever. But I would like to see the Liberal Democrats in government after next May. Tony Blair said the problem with politics is you start popular but inexperienced and as you become better at your job you become less popular. I suppose thats happened to us and to me.   He defended Danny Alexanders right to suggest he would like to be leader one day.   Danny is a fantastically close friend and colleague. I dont see whats wrong with ambition. This whole game where you go to people who personally reasonably have longer-term ambitions. They are not trying to stab anyone in the back, they are just saying ˜Yeah maybe some time in the future. Its hardly a sin for Danny to say he might if the circumstances are right.   Clegg challenged David Cameron to say whether or not he would accept televised leaderss debates.   This foot-dragging by the Conservatives is getting rather boring now. Lets just get on with it. We had the TV debates last time, people enjoyed them, they livened up the whole thing, theyre actually quite good fun.  The Tories should come clean - if they want to run scared they should come clean and say they dont want to do them, but not this endless ducking and weaving. I think people want the TV debates and the more people can see how the leaders measure up against each other the better.   He dismissed Jeremy Brownes criticism of the Lib Dem slogan.   Jeremy is talking completely out of the back of his head. Its all about delivering opportunity. What is more liberal than opportunity? Jeremy maybe has only read the first bit of the slogan and omitted the whole point of it, which is that we want opportunity for everyone. We are the party of opportunity in a way that the other parties cant remotely claim any longer.   Kris Hopkins, a communities minister, has defended Eric Pickles after Ed Davey accused him of coming close to abusing ministerial power over onshore windfarms. (See 3.50pm.) Hopkins said:   Inappropriately sited wind turbines can be a blot on the landscape, harming the local environment and damaging heritage for miles around. The coalition government, with collective agreement amongst ministers, intentionally and transparently changed planning guidance and appeal ˜recovery rules to ensure that these issues are better taken into account.  At the same time, democratically accountable ministers have been recovering planning appeals that would otherwise be made by planning inspectors. Wind farm applications only go to appeal when they have been rejected by the local council but the wind farm developer wants that local decision overturned.  Thats all from me for tonight. Thanks for the comments.    Updated at 6.28pm BST     5.45pm BST       My colleague Michael White is writing the conference diary for tomorrows paper. Here it is.  Major plane crash yesterday for lobbyists who stalk Lib Dem conferences nowadays, sponsor events and seek to whisper in David Laws power ear. At fringe meetings they even have the cheek to demand more accountability from public bodies without providing much themselves. Alas, wasted effort: delegates noisily rejected the Cleggsters bid to reverse the partys opposition to more runways, especially near London. Shame then that the Lib Dem conference app opens with a full screen advert: where would a new runway deliver most economic growth with the least environmental impact?  Gatwick obviously, pings the answer. Gatwick lobbyists can now forget that option too if a Lib Dem veto survives the election. But will it ? Challenged about a May 7 massacre, Lib Dem peshmerga inside the conference bubble list the 30 seats (out of 58) they expect to hold. The party is solvent too. Ian Wrigglesworth, its ex-Labour party treasurer, boasts he has raised more than Labour from individual donors “ not the unions - for 18 of the last 20 quarters, including cuddly Â£5,000 from Nick Cleggs dad. Being last instead of first to stage their conference, thanks to Scotlands referendum, also allows them to frame their message around their rivals performance:  Do you want Nigel Cameron, Ed Hollande “ or Nice Nick? Lib Dem conference chairfolk use a verb rarely heard in the outside world now. They invite speakers to come to the rostrum and summate. Obviously it stems from the Latin summare, to aggregate or sum up. Only a respectable cousin of consummate. Party black sheep like Mike Hancock and Chris Rennard are conspicuous in Glasgow by their absence. With his Johnny Cash black shirt look, Nick (Im not going to apologise) Clegg remains No1 in the latest Lib Dem power list. But his fierce wife, Miriam, is mysteriously stuck at No 48, behind lovable Shirley Williams (84). It will not guarantee a fully house for Nicks big speech this morning, since some delegates have gone home early.  They heard he was speaking again and fled, says one old hand. Lake District MP, Tim Farron, roused the rabble in his final speech as a popular party president, more early Wordsworth than late. But replacing him is proving hard. Wannabes have to get 200 delegates signatures to be eligible.  Theyre mostly women, but dull ones, admits a power list woman.        5.32pm BST    Tim Farron's speech - Summary    Tim Farrons speech was probably the best theres been at the Lib Dem conference so far. Being party president allows him to range over the entire policy arena and he did with gusto, and more seriousness and fewer jokes than is usual for a Farron speech. He had a particularly strong argument to make about the link between disappointment with politics and globalisation, and he also wins the award for making the most pro-immigration speech weve had from any front-rank politician during the party conference season. Farron is seen as the front runner to succeed Nick Clegg and this speech only makes his position look stronger. If Clegg steps down after the general election, next year Farron could be addressing the conference as leader. Here are the main points. And here is the full text.  Farron said people were disillusioned with politics, not because politicians were out of touch, but because of the effects of globalisation.    Last month we came closer than any of us would like to admit to seeing the breakup of the UK. And mostly not because people bought into narrow nationalism, but because of a justified anger at establishment politics.  Its not principally that those in politics are out of touch or dont get it. Its that politics doesnt deliver. It disappoints.  Maybe it always did, but not like this, nowhere near.  You see, I think politics today disappoints because globalisation has made many people feel powerless, insecure, uncertain.  And as the world changes, they dont see their politicians doing enough to protect them, provide for them, or liberate them.   He said, in the face of globalisation, government was too passive.   The problem is that globalisation has happened in this era of British politics when the consensus has been for passive, cant do government. Government that backs away.  That keeps its hands off the economy.  That leaves its citizens to the ravages of the unfair, unfree and unregulated market.  That post ˜79 consensus: set by Mrs Thatcher, turbo charged by New Labour and clung to by too many, has neutered British government. The unfair market, the unfree market “ the Tory laissez faire market “ it is a clunking dead hand that damages business and growth just as much as state socialism. And it leaves everyone except the wealthiest in our society at the mercies of a globalised economy.    He said he wanted government to be more activist.   I am bored with ˜small c conservatives in more than one political party banging the drum for small government.  Because I say that small government means weak citizens. And it is the reason why, in the eyes of too many people, governments just dont even seem to govern.  They just spectate. Ill tell you what, I didnt get into politics to spectate.  I got into politics to do something.    He strongly defended immigration, saying immigrants make Britain great and should be celebrated.   Britains future relies not on turning away the best and the brightest from our shores. Relies not on attacking migrants. Migrants who make a net contribution to our economy. Migrants who are less likely to claim benefits than our own citizens.  Instead we should be grateful and proud that migrants have chosen to relocate their lives here and are working to build our economy.  These people make Britain great, we should celebrate them not demonise them.   He said the Lib Dems had to make the case for an inclusive society.   Because I believe that people know that Britains future is as an open, inclusive society.  And we have to win these arguments. Because the nationalism, isolationism and misanthropy of UKIP and the Tories is a serious threat and it needs to be treated as such.  Liberal Democrats alone in the European elections recognised that, and we took nationalism on. While Cameron pandered and Miliband panicked.  You cant win an argument if you arent willing to have it. And the other parties had ducked it for far too long.  His line about not being able to win an argument unless you have it was excellent, but the big flaw with this passage was Farrons failure to explain why having an argument with Nigel Farage during the European elections worked out so badly for Nick Clegg.  He launched a strong attack on nationalism.   You see patriots love their country, nationalists hate their neighbours.  Nationalists dodge the real political issues and they displace all blame for our predicament on others.    He joked about Ed Milibands conference speech.   Ed Miliband got a load of stick for only remembering half of his speech, but thats still 50 per cent more than the rest of us remembered.   He said that Churchill would be a liberal if he were alive today (as he was at an early stage in his career, when he was a minister in the Asquith government) because he would not approve of David Camerons stance on the European convention on human rights.   While the tories major announcement was to scrap the human rights act, because and I quote ˜people get very frustrated with human rights.  So Mr Cameron, which of these do you find especially frustrating? the right to life, the ban on torture, protection against slavery, the right to a fair trial, respect for privacy, freedom of thought and religion, free speech and peaceful protest¦..  These are not frustrations, these are integral to what it is to be British.  And they are the legacy of Winston Churchill. And seeing the Tories trashing his legacy, I am in no doubt that today he would once again be a Liberal.    He praised Nick Cleggs record in government, particularly his work to end child detention in asylum centres.   Who seriously thinks that the Tories would have given freedom to the 3,500 children of asylum seekers who would have been held in detention? 3,500 children who will never know what horrors they were spared nor who to thank for being spared them.  I doubt that Nick Clegg won a single vote for ending that shameful detention of innocent children, but its in moments like that when you see someones integrity.    He said the Lib Dems had to fight the election on a platform for the future, not on their record in government.   So, while being proud of our record, lets also be very clear about this: People vote with their eyes fixed forward, not looking over their shoulders.  They are not interested in the past, they are interested in the future.  Their votes depend on what happens next, not what happened last. Looking back alone will not win us a single seat next May.    He said councils and housing associations should be let off the leash and allowed to build more homes.   He said Britain needed not just HS2, but better east-west rail links too.   We have to tackle East-West links in the UK too. So we should be planning not just HS2, but HS3, 4 and 5 too! Starting with a high speed link between Hull and Liverpool, through Leeds, Bradford and Manchester. Connecting East and West as quickly and as seamlessly as we connect North and South.    He said the government should be more positive about promoting green energy. Being green was pro-business, he claimed.   We should be proud of Ed Daveys leadership, and we should claim a green future that is optimistic, inspiring. Winning the war on climate change is not about hair-shirts and austerity, its about a positive, innovative, hugely motivating mission to beat catastrophe and boost Britains economy.  If you are not pro-Green then you are not pro-business.   He said the Lib Dems should do more to improve the representation of women in the party.      Tim Farron delivering his conference speech Photograph: Christopher Furlong/Getty Images      Updated at 5.33pm BST     4.46pm BST       Tim Farrons speech was very good.    Farron identifies root cause of UKIP support: &quot;People have been left insecure and uncertain by globalisation&quot;.&mdash; George Eaton (@georgeeaton) October 7, 2014      Nice line from Farron: &quot;patriots love their country; nationalists hate their neighbours&quot;&mdash; Jeremy Cliffe (@JeremyCliffe) October 7, 2014      Impressive standing ovation for Farron confirms his status as frontrunner to be the next leader.&mdash; George Eaton (@georgeeaton) October 7, 2014    Full summary coming up soon.       4.32pm BST       Heres a Lib Dem reading list.  Stephen Tall at ConservativeHome offers five thoughts from the Lib Dem conference.   Its compulsory for Lib Dem MPs with leadership ambitions to deny they have any leadership ambitions. They know if they were to speak out loud what theyre thinking “ Yeah Id like to be leader and chances are therell be a vacancy in seven months so Im making some plans so Im ready “ the headlines would be ˜Cleggs leadership rocked, Lib Dems in chaos. So they dont speak it aloud. But “ quietly, gently, cautiously “ hopefuls are beginning to limber up.   James Morris, a Labour pollster, says at the New Statesman says being centrist has not helped the Lib Dems.   It may not look like it, but over the last four years, the Liberal Democrats have achieved exactly what their strategists hoped. They are indeed seen as the most centrist party - closer to the median voter than any of their competitors according to this poll. The thing is, centrism hasnt panned out that well for them electorally. It turns out being on the centre ground is far from sufficient. Why?  When strategists and commentators talk about the need to be in the centre, they can mean three different things (and often some muddle of all three). Sometimes the centre is an idea about public opinion: what the average voter thinks. Sometimes the centre is a brand idea: the place between the traditional positions of the parties. Sometimes the centre is an ideological idea, relating to policies that are neither left-wing nor right-wing.   These different ideas of centre often cohere, but frequently they dont.   Anoosh Chakelian at the Staggers says the Lib Dems seem to be cooling on the idea of a coalition with Labour.   Charlotte Henry at Total Politics says Kirsty Williams could be the next Lib Dem leader but one.        4.17pm BST       Tim Farron has just started his last speech to the party as party president. Ill post a summary when Ive seen the full text.       3.50pm BST    Ed Davey accuses Pickles of being close to 'abusing ministerial power'    Here are the main points from Ed Davey, the energy secretarys, speech.  Davey accused Eric Pickles, the Conservative communities secretary, of being close to abusing ministerial power because of the way he was opposing onshore windfarms.   There are other Tories I still have to battle. Eric Pickles, for example. On onshore wind. Onshore wind has been growing fast under us. It now generates around 5% of our electricity, and its still growing. But the Tories dont like this. Day after day theyve urged me to cap onshore wind. Ive just said no. Not just because its vital for climate change. But also to keep energy bills down, as onshore wind is now the cheapest large scale green energy option. Yet Mr Pickles doesnt seem worried about climate or energy bills. Mr Pickles “ who claims to be a champion of localism “ has been calling in every onshore wind planning application he can. Interfering with the independent Planning Inspectorate process. Over-riding decisions of elected councillors. Mr Pickles is in danger of bringing the planning system into disrepute. Of abusing ministerial power. And so preventing Britain getting the green power revolution it needs.   Davey said he was opposing Conservative attempts to allow a free-for-all on fracking. He said simply opposing shale gas was wrong. But it was not a magic bullet either, he said.   As North Sea gas production falls, we simply cannot afford to turn our back on our own, home grown gas supplies. But I have had to hold back the Tories desire to frack every square mile of Britain. Ensuring that gas exploration is safe. Protecting our national parks, areas of outstanding beauty and world heritage sites. Stopping a Tory free-for-all on fracking.   He confirmed that he was announcing an extra Â£100m for energy saving measures. (See 9.11am.)   He said the EU was close to agreeing a decision to cut greenhouse gas emissions by at least 40% by 2030.   Thats almost the equivalent of 27 European countries copying Britains Climate Change Act. And it would strongly influence the rest of the worlds ambition on climate change.   He said he had set up a community energy team at the Department of Energy. It was helping communities power themselves, he said.   He said the Lib Dems were the disruptive, insurgent force of British politics. As examples, he cited Paddy Ashdown making the case for higher taxation for education, Charles Kennedy opposing the Iraq war and Nick Clegg breaking the Labour/Tory monopoly on power. The Lib Dems had to show people that was still the case, he said.   Being in government has meant we have won radical change on a national scale. But its also created a problem for us. Convincing people were still the same Liberal Democrats “ the disruptive, insurgent force of British politics. Thats more difficult when youre in government. And yet we are still the insurgents of British politics. Judged by the dramatic changes Liberal Democrat Ministers have pushed through, we have truly disrupted the old order. But, Conference, weve got to shout much louder about it.      Ed Davey addressing the conference Photograph: Jeff J Mitchell/Getty Images         2.53pm BST       Rupert Read, the Green party transport spokesman, has put out this statement about the Gatwick vote.  It is laughable really that the Lib Dem leadership still claim to have even a fig leaf of ˜green credentials, when they are willing to come out with the most climate-destructive policy possible: airport-expansion.        2.39pm BST    Business organisations criticise Lib Dems over Gatwick vote    Two business organisations have criticised the Lib Dems following their vote against Gatwick expansion. This is from John Cridland, the CBI director general.  Growing airport capacity in the south east is critical to the UKs economic future. Business will be extremely disappointed that the Liberal Democrat delegates fail to recognise this.  It is unhelpful to pre-judge the decision of the Airports commission, which the Liberal Democrats helped to set up. All parties must endorse the commissions final recommendation when it reports back next summer.  And this is from Adam Marshall, executive director of policy at the British Chambers of Commerce.  The Liberal Democrats are out of touch with British business needs when it comes to aviation and airports. Undermining the Airports commission is short-termist and wrong-headed. No political party should rule out options for aviation expansion when the need for more capacity is so apparent. The next government, whatever its political colour, must commit to a real solution to the capacity crunch in the South East - starting with a commitment to implement Sir Howard Daviess conclusions on a new runway when they are released next year.        2.32pm BST       Ed Davey, the energy secretary, is addressing the conference now. Ill post more when Ive read his speech.       2.14pm BS"
"Lyse Doucet is the BBCs chief international correspondent. She has reported from Libya, Syria, Afghanistan and Ukraine, among other places. Born in Canada, she started working for the BBC in west Africa in 1983. Youre going to Lahore tomorrow “ what are you doing there?Im going to the Lahore literary festival, which has only been going for three years. I went to the first one to make the point that Pakistan is more than terrorism. Lahore justifiably talks about itself as the literary capital. Its politics as well as literature. But its also a celebration, a statement. This week there was a suicide bombing in Lahore, and so I tweeted that I was still coming. Im going to Pakistan and then on to Gaza. Youve reported on several wars. Often war reporters are male, sometimes macho and a bit pompous. Do you feel comfortable in that milieu?War reporting is like any kind of reporting. Journalists come in all shapes and sizes. Some are just interested in the bombs and the bullets, some in the social-cultural-political aspects of war, some want to cover the human cost of war. Ive met journalists who love war, love the adrenaline rush. I dont, and none of my closest colleagues would say they do either. Some conflicts go on for decades. Do you ever wonder if reporting on them isÂ futile?Do you mean, whats the point? Well, take Libya, its four years since the protest started against Gaddafi in Benghazi, which was a historic moment, an heroic moment of a people rising up and writing a story that everyone wants to tell. Now suddenly its become the ugliest of wars that makes you cringe at the savagery of it. In terms of us as journalists, though, its a privilege to tell these stories. But I think it is OK to turn away occasionally to remind yourself that its not a normal state of affairs. Its hard “ but lets be clear, the storys not about me. Theres an argument that much of the savagery, particularly by Isis, is done to grab headlines and hijack the news agenda. Is that an issue for you?This is a real challenge to journalists editorially. On the one hand, you dont want to give them the oxygen of publicity, but on the other you cannot pretend its not happening. Because unfortunately [the videos put out by Isis] are the most grotesque form of violence and weapon of war that all of us have ever seen. So we cant ignore it. But you should never show the beheading. Every time we do a story theres a discussion about what we can show, and it goes through a lot of editors. Sometimes theres anger on the ground because the reporters took a lot of risks and what they filmed is edited out. Do you have a particular philosophy for war reporting?I look at war as relationships among people, relationships between neighbours, friends, mothers and fathers and children. For me, that is the best way to convey a reality that none of us would recognise or ever want to live in. Im a big believer in the small story telling the big story. So a man in the city of Homs who has a piano shop, you tell those small stories and they draw people into a larger more complicated story. I always say you dont have to dramatise a dramatic story. Just tell it like it is. Thats enough. Our job is to make sure people dont turn away. Do you ever get scared? And if you do, what do you do to conquer that fear?There is no war worth dying for but there are stories worth taking risks for. The Catch 22 is that in the wars of our time you sometimes dont know the risk until its too late. Im not going into northern Syria now. No one is. Its not just a mistake or bad luck if you get kidnapped “ its a certainty it will happen. I mostly go to places where I have a comfort level. Ive been working in Afghanistan since 1988 and in the Middle East since 1994. You know the highways and byways, and you know the signals. For me, the really important thing is that, almost without exception, no matter where I go, I work with someone Ive known for a long time. Has reporting made you more or less political?It all comes down to politics but my job is not to take sides. I used to always quote the Italian Marxist Gramsci, who had this great expression: optimism of the will, pessimism of the intellect. Then I thought there must be some other way of looking at the world, and I started subscribing to what Archbishop Desmond Tutu said, that we are prisoners of hope. More and more I believe the journalism I want to do is not taking sides, but I have no hesitation taking the sides of the people, or the children. Because theyre caught in the middle. Thats my politics. Humanitarian politics. You were in Minsk last week, going to Lahore tomorrow. What toll does reporting take on the rest of your life?I tend to think of the world as a country and London as its capital. Travelling is a state of mind. Some people get really stressed out when they have to pack and get on a plane. I dont think of it as stressful. When I have dinner in Kabul, I never think, Oh, I have to get home to my personal life. My personal life is also there. What changes have you seen in reporting since you started in the 80s?The first war I covered was in Chad, and I would go and hang out there for a month. There was no email, and hardly any telephones or telex machines, so you could do that. Now they need to know where you are at every moment. But back then you needed a truck of equipment. Now I can go over live from the centre of Damascus with my telephone. Its very exciting. Thats been the biggest change, and also that we have to do TV, radio, online and social media. It can be demanding. What do you do to relax?I read, swim, meditate, spend time with friends, cook, walk. Im very interested in music, especially music from different cultures. I love watching Graham Norton, cooking programmes. I meet family whenever I can. In a really fast-paced world, you really treasure the moments. Enjoy them and try not to look at your email. Tell me something about yourself thats not widely known.I grew up as a curler. I was on my provincial curling team and went to the winter games in Canada. I have a yellow sweater representing my province in curling. I havent done it in a long while. There are not many ice rinks around, especially ones with blue and red circles."
"¢ Don't sell your AstraZeneca shares just yet. Far from giving up, Pfizer is prodding fund managers like BlackRock ($4tn under its wing) to strong-arm the Anglo-Swedish board into changing its mind, if not now then in three months. Takeover rules allow asset strippers Pfizer to try again in November. BlackRock, which holds no less than 8% of AZ, is not to be confused with Blackwater (now Academi), the US private army whose mercenaries are alleged to be in Ukraine. BlackRock is the one that never shoots its targets.¢ A renewed AZ bid might create problems for top No 10 official Jeremy Heywood, appointed by over-eager Dave to ""broker"" the now aborted deal. During his brief banking career Sir J was involved in unbundling Southern Cross Healthcare's property from its care business. The latter later crashed in flames.¢ Talking of which, Channel 5 is poised to show the 1955 classic The Dam Busters on Monday. Alas, RAF hero Guy Gibson VC (Richard Todd), shortsightedly named his dog the N-word. Fortunately C5 has only just been sold by Richard ""Asian Babes"" Desmond so no editing risk need be taken with viewer sensibilities. Despite winning a Desmond libel suit in 2009, Tom Bower's biography of RD remains unpublished.¢ Social media news hounds speak of ""pre-cognition"" when they spot a story before it's become one. But the tabloids have been doing that for decades. It was a smart Daily Mail reporter in Canada who realised that Charlie Windsor's kindly wittering to an elderly Holocaust survivor could be turned into a ""Putin is Hitler"" sensation. Poor Charlie has since been urged to ""abdicate"" even before he even gets to be king, if he ever does. Six previous princes of Wales didn't.¢ But what about President Putin? Will a spanking from the House of GlÃ¼cksburg (the Queen is a GlÃ¼cksburg by marriage) help or hinder his chances of winning the 2014 Nobel peace prize, despite Ukraine? Vlad has been nominated by a Russian peace group for brokering peace in Syria (you missed it?), but is up against Pope Frankie and plucky Pakistani teen&nbsp;Malala Yousafzai. Barack Obama won in 2009, but that was before he'd had time to do any harm.¢ Too-nice-to-be-PM, ex-Mod Alan Johnson's moving childhood memoir, This Boy, picked up the Orwell book prize this week on top of the Ondaatje prize for a work evoking ""a sense of place"" about the poor end of Notting Hill. Volume I's hero was the future cabinet minister's big sister, Linda. In Volume 2, still being written, Johnson gets married and becomes a postie in Slough. Evoking a sense of place will be harder work, he concedes.¢ So they've done it. If socially disadvantaged columnists like Tony Parsons and Richard Littlejohn have managed to get to the polling station and work out which Ukip-style party is the real one on the ballot paper, they have voted Farage, as they promised readers. But romantic disorientation is not confined to the redtops. Peter Oborne has had a Ukip knee-trembler in the Spectator and our own, very English George Monbiot declared he would gladly vote SNP if it would end feudalism in the Highlands (evidence suggests otherwise). As for Times science boffin Lord Matt Ridley, he would vote Farage if only he were more libertarian like Gladstone, keeping politics out of bedroom and boardroom. It's all kicking off.¢ Did convivial Irish playwright Brendan Behan first say ""fuck"" on TV (albeit slurred) in 1956? Or did pyrotechnic critic Ken Tynan break the taboo in 1965? Tory sage Sir Perry Worsthorne joined in 1973. So in parliament did MP Reg Race in 1982. But on Thursday Nick Herbert, who quit as police minister because Theresa May wasn't radical enough (ho, ho), became the first MP to deploy ""fuckwit"" when debating with an ex-copper on BBC2's Daily Politics. At least he didn't say ""pleb"".¢ CND was outraged when Lynx deodorant used its iconic logo in its ""peace"" campaign. Shamed Unilever has finally shelled out a donation.Twitter: @michaelwhite"
"A missing 15-year-old British girl may be attempting to get to Syria to join up with Islamist fighters after becoming radicalised, police have said. The teenager, who has not been named but is believed to be of Somali origin, has been tracked by police since she left her home in Bristol. It is thought she met a 17-year-old girl in London before the pair boarded a plane to Istanbul, Turkey. Officers are desperate to find her before she crosses the border into Syria. Avon and Somersets assistant chief constable Louisa Rolfe said there were indications the girl may have been radicalised. She said: We can confirm that a 15-year-old student from Bristol has travelled to Turkey and we understand she may be attempting to make her way to Syria. Since she was reported missing by her parents weve carried out extensive work to trace her footsteps from the time she left home to her arrival in Istanbul, Turkey. Were giving every support we can to her family. We want to find out where she is and encourage her to return safely. There are indications she may have been radicalised but at the moment our priority is to find her before she crosses the border to Syria and make sure she is safe. We must all be vigilant and ready to spot the signs of radicalisation. The family of the missing 15-year-old urged her to return to her home. Hibaq Jama, a Labour councillor and spokeswoman for the family, said: Please come back, we miss you very much. You are not in any trouble. We just want you to be safe and come home as soon as possible. She added that the schoolgirl was incredibly bright, articulate and popular. She said the teen had left for school as usual on the morning of her disappearance, but that when her father went to collect her at 3.30pm she wasnt there. The spokeswoman said the family were devastated and distraught. The girls parents reported her missing last Wednesday and Avon and Somerset police said the search involved detectives from the Metropolitan force and their network of international liaison officers. In Bristol, police will be investigating how any radicalisation took place and trying to find anyone else who might be tempted to head for Syria. Rolfe added: Often, young Muslims who go to Syria hold can be naive and dont recognise that they are being sucked into joining extremist groups. This is not about criminalising these young people, its about preventing tragedies. An estimated 500 to 600 Britons are believed to have travelled to Syria, and 250 have since returned. Among them are brothers Nasser and Aseel Muthana, 20 and 17, and their friend Reyaad Khan, also 20, all from Cardiff, just 40 miles down the M4 from Bristol. Nasser and Khan appeared in a terrorist recruitment video."
"Even after immigrating as a child from Syria, for a new life, I learned to view my new government with a certain level of suspicion. My parents drilled into my head the understanding that law enforcement and government officials were there to protect &quot;the community&quot; “ but whether that protected community would be mine, well, that felt like an open question in the United States after 9/11.  Our parents had to caution my siblings and I to be wary of strangers at the various mosques and community centers that we frequented, just in case those strangers might try to convince us to participate in radically-informed activities. My father himself was no stranger to the odd men who would appear out of nowhere, spout plans to commit &quot;jihad&quot; against the &quot;horrible American government&quot; and then disappear entirely once they discovered that nobody else was particularly enthusiastic about their quest.  So to many of us, this week&apos;s Human Rights Watch report outlining just how many of the foiled terrorist conspiracies were, in reality, sting operations conducted by our own government “ well, that came as no surprise. The report alleges that &quot;[i]n some cases the FBI may have created terrorists out of law-abiding individuals by suggesting the idea of taking terrorist action or encouraging the target to act.&quot;  The Human Rights Watch findings underscore the conclusions of a recent Al Jazeera documentary, Informants, which found that the FBI actively targeted Muslim communities and individuals the bureau deemed vulnerable, and enlisted informants to expressly ensnare the latter within fabricated conspiracies. Add to all of that a long list of the ways in which law enforcement targeted Muslims for suspicion and surveillance based entirely on their shared faith: FBI informants were sent for years into Muslim American communities; the NYPD surveilled religious centers and &quot;suspected&quot; locations; Muslim Americans were even placed on the No Fly List if they refused to become government informants. Many from outside the Muslim American community have been shocked by these revelations and others like them. But for me “ beyond the feeling that my long-held suspicions have been confirmed “ the knowledge that my faith makes me suspicious in the eyes of the government to which I&apos;ve pledged my allegiance, well, that fazes me less and less everyday.  And for every one of me, there is at least one other young person whose childhood has been shaped by the reality of constant surveillance, government stings and wannabe informants. After 9/11, I learned quite quickly to keep my head down because I thought that, if I could stay under most people&apos;s radars, I could thrive a world in which stories of warrantless deportations, faith-based workplace discrimination (and termination) and arrests that resulted in unending detention were common.  I was clearly not alone in making life choices based on my perception that I was “ or could be “ under surveillance. A 2014 study from the University of California at Berkeley showed that, whether or not Muslim Americans reported being monitored, they still felt significant levels of anxiety and anger about it. We know that we&apos;re often discriminated against by our government and our fellow Americans, but studies still show that Muslim Americans feel more loyalty to the US than ever. Every year, more and more individuals from my faith commit themselves to civic engagement, seeking to educate themselves and their neighbors, and better the country in which they live “ often because of the conviction that nobody else should have to face what they went through growing up after 9/11. Though many Muslims Americans like me kept quiet in the years after 9/11 for fear of arousing illegitimate government suspicion, we&apos;ve since learned that it is not silence that will keep the government from overstepping its bounds. We need to be visible, to be active, and to speak up when the government uses our religion as the basis for persecution. Revelations like even those in this latest, extensive report won&apos;t scare us any more “ they&apos;ll only serve to push more Muslim Americans into public service."
"Carly Fiorina received a BA from Stanford in medieval history and philosophy almost 40 years ago, but shes always ready to revisit her undergraduate glory days. Last Sunday, the Republican presidential candidate tried to burnish her national security credentials by claiming that her bachelors degree prepared her to fight Isis. She said: Finally my degree in medieval history and philosophy has come in handy, because what Isis wants to do is drive us back to the Middle Ages, literally. Id like to state unequivocally that my years of training to become a professor of medieval history in no way make me fit to be appointed commander-in-chief of the US military. While the Middle Ages do in fact shape contemporary events all the time, Fiorina unfortunately almost always gets the lessons of history wrong. When we use the word medieval to characterize something we dont like, be it Isis, the Ferguson Police department or Russias drivers license regulations, we are trying to impose chronological distance between ourselves and things we find unpleasant. Thinking of these distasteful or evil aspects of the modern world as belonging to the past makes it harder, not easier, to understand their root causes and fight them. That hasnt stopped Fiorina from bringing up her medieval history training surprisingly often. It used to just be part of her self-made mythology: she graduated from Stanford with a degree that taught her how to think, but no specific skills, dropped out of law school, then clawed her way to the top.  The veracity of that story has been called into question, but she does make good points about the value of a humanities education, saying: My medieval history and philosophy degree ¦ did prepare me for life ¦ I learned how to condense a whole lot of information down to the essence. That thought process has served me my whole life ¦ Im one of these people who believes we should be teaching people music, philosophy, history, art. I wish more of her Republican colleagues would take these words to heart. Lately, though, its all about scoring partisan points. Shes incorporated her quip about Isis driving us back to the Middle Ages as a standard part of her stump speech since at least last March. Its a joke, perhaps, but given that her complete lack of national security credentials is a campaign issue, its not a throwaway line. She really does seem to be claiming that her undergraduate degree will enable her to make sound foreign policy decisions, despite her lack of experience.  Moreover, touting her medieval credentials is a way for her to play to culture warriors who believe that Christianity is under attack. President Obama made a remark about The Crusades at the National Prayer Breakfast in February, citing those medieval religious wars as one example of the ways that Christianity, like all other religions, had been used to justify violence. Fiorina pounced. As well as claiming expertise in how to fight Isis, she criticizes Obama as historically inaccurate. It is true that Isis wants to plunge the world back into the middle ages, she said. Its just that most of us moved on about 800 years ago, and we need to defeat that evil enemy. Medieval history to the rescue. As a medievalist, I believe that we need to study the past in order to respond to the present, but we must learn the right things. Isis is, undoubtedly, inspired by medieval and pre-medieval Islamic ideas about power, purity and what they believe to be the true nature of Islam. Medieval Islam, like all religions, contained many different types of ideas and practices. Some were comparatively tolerant and open to innovation and differences; others were more restrictive. I argue, as the president did in February, that you can look into the history of any religion and find examples of both the best and worst of humanity within it, then draw inspiration as you see fit. Its vital to recognize, though, as John Terry writes in Slate, that the viciousness of Isis emerges from its modernity, not its artificial links to the past. Terry writes: Isis is not re-enacting the seventh-century Arab conquests, even though some among its ranks may think they are. Theyre nostalgic for a make-believe past, and those among them who know plenty about Islams first decades have conveniently revised medieval history to fit modern ideological needs.  Isis depends on modernity. Their growth was made possible by modern wars “ from the division of the Middle East post-World War I to the most recent wars in Iraq and Syria. Its only in this ultra-modern context that a group like Isis could grow and flourish. They expertly deploy modern technology to recruit and communicate. Some of their recruits even purchased Islam for Dummies before trying to head to the war zone. Now theres an ultra-modern fake it until you make it mentality. If Carly Fiorina really wants to draw on the Middle Ages for inspiration, I do have some suggestions. Lesson one: support universities, scholars, writers and artists, as their contributions outlive us all. Lesson two: peasants, oppressed for too long, always rebel. Lesson three: dont go to war in the Middle East without a good exit plan."
"US President Barack Obama said on Thursday that he has not yet developed a strategy to combat Islamic State (Isis) militants, months after the jihadist army erased the border between Iraq and Syria and more than a week after it beheaded an American citizen. We dont have a strategy yet, Obama told reporters at the White House, indicating a reluctance to expand his bombing campaign into Syria.  Obama said that he had asked Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel and General Martin Dempsey, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, to prepare a range of options for confronting Isis. But pushing back against fervent speculation that he is preparing to bomb Isis in Syria, Obama said those military plans will be limited to Iraq.  Our core priority right now is just to make sure our folks are safe, Obama said.  Obamas national security team convened at the White House Thursday afternoon to discuss the contours of a still-inchoate strategy. Administration officials have recently begun describing Isis in apocalyptic and near-hysterical terms, even as they decline to endorse additional military action against it, a discrepancy that has prompted confusion in Washington and beyond. To the degree Obamas emerging approach to Isis has a centerpiece, it is enlisting regional allies, particularly Sunni Arab nations, to aid in isolating and attacking Isis. Secretary of State John Kerry will soon leave for the Middle East to continue coalition-building.  Some current and former administration officials, speaking on background, have expressed frustration with Obama for not yet forming a comprehensive approach to Isis, and especially for not attempting to take territory in eastern Syria away from the jihadi group. Others contend that the administrations options are inherently limited if it seeks not to Americanize yet another Middle Eastern war.  Still others have said they expect Obamas military operations against Isis to eventually expand in scope, mission and geographic reach. Obama was initially reluctant about the Afghanistan surge, the Libya air war and the arming of Syrian rebels, only to eventually embrace all those options.  Obama gave some indications that he is far from persuaded on attacking Syria, but also that his views have yet to solidify. He portrayed US military action as less significant than Iraqi and regional investment in political reconciliation, a point frequently made last decade by US generals, albeit few who were skeptical of escalation in Iraq.  The idea that the United States or any outside power would perpetually defeat Isis, I think, is unrealistic, Obama said.  We can rout Isis on the ground and keep a lid on things temporarily, but then as soon as we leave, the same problems come back again. Weve got to make sure Iraqis understand that in the end they are responsible for their own security. Yet Obama signaled an openness to an international coalition providing additional air support for Iraqi and Kurdish forces that have begun to take some territory away from Isis, a potential expansion of the air war.  Already the 106 US airstrikes in Iraq “ now occurring daily, and most recently on Thursday “ have expanded in focus from protecting Yazidis atop Mount Sinjar “ now an abandoned mission “ to protecting Iraqi Kurdistan and pushing Isis back from the critical Mosul Dam, mostly under the broad rubric of protecting US personnel in Iraq. Additional internationalization of the conflict is likely to be a subject of discussion at next weeks Nato summit in Cardiff, as well as next months United Nations session.  About the only option Obama forswore was tacitly or explicitly reversing course and aligning with Syrian dictator Bashar Assad, whom Obama nearly attacked last year, against their common foe. Frankly, Assad doesnt seem to have the capability or reach to get into those areas where Isis operates, Obama said. A US official recently observed that Assads air defenses now render the skies over eastern Syria relatively permissible, which may reduce the risk US pilots could face should Obama order attacks on Isis in eastern Syria. A US special operations team was able to secretly infiltrate Syria from the air earlier this summer in an unsuccessful mission to free US hostages.  Obama said he would continue consultations with Congress, but stopped short of committing to a congressional vote on military action, as some lawmakers desire. He dismissed that as premature, as his strategy has yet to develop. Last year, Obamas surprise decision to seek congressional approval for strikes against Assad aroused congressional skepticism, and a vote was forestalled after Russia brokered an unexpected accord to divest Assad of the chemical weapons precursors that had prompted the US to consider strikes. "
"In all the coverage of the refugee crisis, something has been missing. There have been few older faces in the pictures that have beamed round the world.  While the reality is that older refugees dont make the headlines, they are at the heart of the crisis. According to the UN Refugee Agency, more than 10% of the people who have fled Syria in recent years are over 65-years old (pdf). Their plight is desperate with many of them having been separated from their families in the chaos of flight or bereaved along the way.   Related: Remarkable lives: care home residents get the chance to tell their stories    Watching the horror unfold, like many others, I was deeply touched. But what really translated that into action was the people who live, work and volunteer for us in our charitable housing organisation, The Abbeyfield Society. Many of them really felt for the older refugees and started to ask how they could help. There is no doubt that our staff, volunteers and residents can be a quite a force. Many of them lived through the second world war or are baby boomers used to taking action. Things moved pretty fast and the prime ministers announcement that the UK would welcome up to 20,000 refugees by 2020 gave us a focus. No one seemed to know how many of these refugees would be older people, but whatever the final number turns out to be, we felt sure that if we offered to take as many as we could, other providers would follow our lead.  The Abbeyfield Society made its formal offer to the prime minister within 48 hours of his statement in the House of Commons. With nearly 60 years experience of providing sheltered housing and specialist homes for older people, we knew we had something worthwhile to give. We have told the government that as long as it covers the cost, we will do the rest and offer homes to as many older refugees as we can for up to six months. Translating that into action is another challenge entirely. The logistics are massive. If nothing else, it is well nigh impossible to predict in advance where we may have spaces and what the range of individual needs of the Syrians will be. How will these older people fit into our homes, many of which are small with a family like atmosphere? Will the Syrians be able to cope in a strange place and possibly without being able to speak the language? At the moment, there may be more questions than answers, but we remain undaunted. I believe that through our close contacts with social services, health commissioners and other care providers we will find suitable places for older refugees.   Related: Retirement villages offer a better quality of life for older people, survey finds    I also know that our fantastic volunteers will help see us through. I know its a cliche, but they are absolutely Abbeyfields lifeblood, all 4,500 of them.  When I approached our chairman, a volunteer himself, with the idea of taking our share of older Syrians, I couldnt be sure how he would react. I neednt have given that a thought. Without a moments hesitation he was on board and reassured me that it was the right thing to do.  With this support, I think we will be able to offer older refugees what they are likely to need most, and that is time. Sometimes a cup of tea and a chat are worth 10 times more than specialist professional input.  We still have so much to do to prepare for the refugees, but at the end of it all, the kettle will go on and the Abbeyfield family will open its doors."
"Luke Hardings report (11 August) considerably underplays the extent to which Turkey has sought to reverse Kurdish gains in Syria and Iraq on the pretext of confronting Isis. Far from being embroiled in a two-front war, Turkey has carried out hardly any attacks against Isis and has instead focused on bombing raids on PKK camps in northern Iraq. Almost all the jihadis entering Syria did so via Turkey. There are an estimated 12,000 jihadis. Thats a lot to miss. In 2014, when the al-Qaida affiliate al-Nusra captured Kassab, it was clear theyd been allowed to mobilise from within Turkey. Ankara initially opposed the movement of Iraqi Kurdish peshmerga to lift the siege of Kobani by Isis. So far as Recep Tayyip ErdoÄŸan is concerned, the PKK represents a greater threat to Turkish interests than Isis.Â  Moreover, ditching the peace process has domestic benefits for ErdoÄŸan. The 2015 electoral success of the Kurdish left party, HDP, left ErdoÄŸan without a mandate. Cracking down on terrorism now gives him a chance to target the terrorist- supporting HDP. In all of this the west colludes, on the basis that a war on Isis is promised. As they were in Iraq in 1991, Kurdish and democratic interests have been sold out to expediency once again.Nick MossLondon ¢ Natalie NougayrÃ¨de argues President Obama has refrained from getting involved in Syria, declining to implement a summer 2012 plan to arm Syrian rebels (Opinion, 11 August). The exact opposite is true. On 1 August 2012, Reuters reported that Obama has signed a secret order authorising US support for rebels seeking to depose Syrian president Bashar al-Assad and his government which broadly permits the CIA and other US agencies to provide support. In June this year, the Washington Post quoted US officials as saying the CIA has trained and equipped nearly 10,000 fighters sent into Syria over the past several years.Ian SinclairLondon"
"In the desert, the smugglers lace their water with petrol so the smuggled wont gulp it down and cost more. Sometimes the trucks theyre packed into stall crossing the Sahara; they have to jump out to push, and some are left behind when the trucks drive off again. In transit camps in Libya before the perilous venture across the Blue Desert, they play football, fight, and pool their scanty resources so an even poorer friend can pay his way. One man says his tiny wooden boat was flanked by dolphins as they made the journey, three on each side, like guardian angels, and this was what gave him hope. These are the people we are allowing to die in the Mediterranean. The EUs de facto policy is to let migrants drown to stop others coming. Last year nearly four thousand bodies were recovered from the Med. Those are just the ones we found. The total number of arrivals in Italy in 2014 went up over 300% from the year before, to more than 170,000. And the EUs response, driven by the cruellest British government in living memory, was to cut the main rescue operation, Mare Nostrum.   Related: Italian authorities rescue over 4,000 would-be migrants at sea in four days    The inevitable result is that 500 people have already died this year. The figure for the equivalent period in 2014 was 15. There are half a million people in Libya waiting to make the crossing. How many more deaths can we stomach? Migration illustrates one of the signal features of modern life, which is malice by proxy. Like drones and derivatives, migration policy allows the powerful to inflict horrors on the powerless without getting their hands dirty. James Brokenshire, the minister who defended cutting Mare Nostrum on the nauseatingly hypocritical grounds that it encouraged migration, never has to let the deaths his decision helped to cause spoil his expensive lunch with lobbyists. It doesnt affect him. But it does affect us. Right now we are a diminished and reduced society, bristling with suspicion and distrust of others even as we perversely struggle with loneliness and alienation. We breathe the toxic smog of hatred towards immigrants pumped out by Nigel Farage and Katie Hopkins, and it makes us lesser people. Forget the fact that this society wouldnt work without migrants, that nobody else will pick your vegetables and make your latte and get up at 4am to clean your office. Forget the massive tax contribution made by migrants to the Treasury. This is not about economics. Far too often, even the positive takes on migration are driven by numbers and finance, by What can they do for us?. This is about two things: compassion and responsibility. Lampedusa, my play currently running at the Soho Theatre, focuses on two people at the sharp end of austerity Europe. Stefano is a coastguard whose job is to fish dead migrants out of the sea. Denise is a collector for a payday loan company. Theyre not liberals. They dont like the people they deal with. They cant afford to. As Stefano says: You try to keep them at arms length. Theres too many of them. And it makes you think, about the randomness of I get to walk these streets, and he doesnt. The ground becomes ocean under your feet.    Migration illustrates one of the signal features of modern life: malice by proxy    But eventually, the human impact of what they do breaks through. And in their consequent struggles, both Stefano and Denise are aided by a friendship, reluctant and questioning, with someone they formerly thought of as a burden. This is compassion not as a lofty feeling for someone beneath you, but as the raw reciprocal necessity of human beings who have nothing but each other. This is where we are in the utterly corrupted, co-opted politics of the early 21st century. The powerful dont give a shit. All we have is us. But equally important is responsibility. In all the rage about migration, one thing is never discussed: what we do to cause it. A report published this week by the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists reveals that the World Bank displaced a staggering 3.4 million people in the last five years. By funding privatisations, land grabs and dams, by backing companies and governments accused of rape, murder and torture, and by putting $50bn into projects graded highest risk for irreversible and unprecedented social impacts, the World Bank has massively contributed to the flow of impoverished people across the globe. The single biggest thing we could do to stop migration is to abolish the development mafia: the World Bank, International Monetary Fund, European Investment Bank and European Bank for Reconstruction and Development. A very close second is to stop bombing the Middle East. The west destroyed the infrastructure of Libya without any clue as to what would replace it. What has is a vacuum state run by warlords that is now the centre of Mediterranean people-smuggling. Were right behind the Sisi regime in Egypt that is eradicating the Arab spring, cracking down on Muslims and privatising infrastructure at a rate of knots, all of which pushes huge numbers of people on to the boats. Our past work in Somalia, Syria and Iraq means those nationalities are top of the migrant list. Not all migration is caused by the west, of course. But lets have a real conversation about the part that is. Lets have a real conversation about our ageing demographic and the massive skills shortage here, what it means for overstretched public services if we let migrants in (wed need to raise money to meet increased demand, and the clearest and fairest way is a rise in taxes on the rich), the ethics of taking the cream of the crop from poor countries. Migration is a complex subject. But lets not be cowards and pretend the migrants will stop coming. Because they wont. This will never stop."
"Syrian officials have refused to confirm reports of an enhanced Russian military build-up in the country, over which the US has expressed concern to Moscow. Damascus insists, however, that Russia remains a loyal and supportive ally.   Related: Assad 'confident' of Russian support for Syria regime    Media reports on Friday quoted Obama administration officials as saying Russia had sent a military advance team to Syria, as well as sending prefabricated housing units for hundreds of people to an airfield near Latakia, which the officials said also received a portable air traffic control station.  US officials said the temporary housing suggested Russia could deploy up to 1,000 advisers or other military personnel to the airfield, which is near the ancestral home of the ruling Assad family, the New York Times reported. In a telephone conversation on Saturday, Secretary of State John Kerry told his Russian counterpart Sergei Lavrov of his concern.  The secretary made clear that if such reports were accurate, these actions could further escalate the conflict, lead to greater loss of innocent life, increase refugee flows and risk confrontation with the [anti-Islamic State] coalition operating in Syria, the State Department said.  Kerry and Lavrov agreed that discussions on Syria would continue this month in New York, where the United Nations general assembly meets. The Los Angeles Times reported that US intelligence has gathered evidence of possible military housing from satellite reconnaissance photos. Russia has backed Assad to the hilt since the start of the countrys bloody civil war in March 2011. Following a flurry of international diplomatic activity that suggested a possible shift in that position, President Bashar al-Assad said in a recent interview that Vladimir Putin was standing by the Syrian government.  Assad is understood not to have commented on the issue when he met Russian journalists in Damascus on Sunday “ though their interviews were not immediately published. The US and Russia have been at loggerheads over Syria. Russia has supported Assad, while the US advocates a political transition to end his rule while backing armed opposition groups.  A US security source told Reuters the US would be watching to see whether any increased Russian might in Syria will be used to push back the Islamic State (Isis) or to bolster Assad.   Related: Assad's confidence in his backers seems well placed - but only for now    The US statement appears at odds with recent hopes for greater co-operation between Washington and Moscow over the Syrian crisis. Western diplomats have said they believe that in the wake of Julys landmark nuclear agreement with Iran “ Assads most important regional ally “ Kerry is now ready to focus far more closely on Syria.  Russia has also held talks with Saudi Arabia, a key backer of the anti-Assad opposition. The view in London and other European capitals is that there are new prospects for diplomacy, in part because of the intense attention being paid to the refugee crisis, but also because Russia is concerned by the increasingly prominent role being played by Iran in Syria.  Moscow has been reaching out to elements of the Syrian opposition in the hope of promoting a managed transition in Damascus. But it is unclear how an enhanced Russian military role, as reported, would be consistent with that.  Reuters contributed to this report "
"Students at the Bethnal Green Academy, the school attended by the three London girls feared to be on their way to Syria to join Islamic State (Isis) militants, returned to class on Monday as the fate of their missing friends remained unknown.  Students and parents expressed their shock at the news that Amira Abase, 15, Shamina Begum, 15 and Kadiza Sultana, 16 had travelled from Gatwick to Istanbul in Turkey and were believed to be heading towards Isis-held territory.            Atlanta Broadbent, a schoolfriend of the three missing teenagers, says she never heard them discuss their plans    The Metropolitan police confirmed on Monday that it had officers in Turkey, while declining to confirm that they were involved in looking for the girls. A spokesman said: Officers are working closely with the Turkish authorities who are providing a great deal of assistance and support to our investigation. Worried parents received a letter on Friday from the east London school, which has been rated outstanding by Ofsted, telling them what had happened and assuring them it was doing everything possible to tackle the situation.  A 15-year-old friend of the three teenagers, who was also a student at the Bethnal Green Academy, ran away to Syria via Turkey in December.            The principal of Bethnal Green academy says there is no evidence that the three girls were radicalised at school    Parents and pupils were hurried through the school gates on Monday morning, the first day back after the half-term break, while police in high-vis clothing kept guard. A parent of two daughters in year nine said the girls disappearance had had a damaging impact on the community. The girls feel terrible. Parents arent letting their kids out. Its devastating.  A mother of another student said: It is so unexpected, its really sad I cant imagine what the families of those girls are going through. As a mum I really feel for them. This is the type of thing you read about but you cant imagine it is happening at your school.           Families plead for return of schoolgirls feared to be in Syria    One sixth-form student, who asked not to be named, said he had never heard the subject of joining Isis talked about among pupils at the school. Im a Muslim, my friends are Muslims [but] people dont really talk about that stuff, he said. Its not like schools full of girls talking about going to join Isis. He did not know the missing girls, but added that everyone was talking about it. Another young man, who gave his name as Mohammed, said: Its crazy. I was proper shocked. People dont really expect to go on holiday then come back and find out that all these girls have gone to Syria. Another parent, who also did not want to be named, defended the school. It is a fantastic school. Ive seen derogatory comments about the school but this is not their fault, he said. What has happened is terrible but I know the school will be working hard “ they are very proactive.  I dont understand, knowing the kids here, knowing this school “ it doesnt make sense.  Dr Muhammad Abdul Bari, the trustee of the East London mosque in Whitechapel and a former teacher in the borough, said there was a sense of shock in the Tower Hamlets community.  Its every parents nightmare that their teenage children would go like this “ disappear from their parents, families and schools. They are very intelligent girls and they had the ability to hide, he said.  They hid their intentions from everyone and the only thing we know is one girl had a connection with Aqsa Mahmood from Scotland. They were definitely convinced by the slick IS media. I think it was online radicalisation. Bari said he objected to the use of the word jihadi brides. He said: Its a misogynistic word. These girls, like young boys, have probably gone for idealistic reasons.   "
"Wisconsin governor Scott Walker remains unequivocal about his personal policy that he will not discuss foreign policy while abroad, which he reiterated before heading on a second European trade mission of 2015. But that hasnt stopped the 2016 Republican presidential hopeful from sending multiple signed tweets directly commenting on foreign policy while overseas this week. Under questioning, the midwestern governor has made several gaffes when wading into the relatively uncharted waters of global affairs, comparing protesters in Wisconsin to members of the Islamic State and suggested he might support ground troops in Syria. On a trade visit to the UK in February, Walker declined not only talk about foreign policy but even to answer a question about his thoughts on evolution.   Related: Scott Walker dodges question about evolution beliefs during trade visit to UK    On Sunday while in Germany, joining fellow potential Republican candidates in attacking Hillary Clinton following her announcement that she would run for president, Walker sent out a tweet attacking the former secretary of state as the architect of what he called Barack Obamas failed foreign policy.    As Secretary of State @HillaryClinton was the architect of the failed foreign policy were seeing executed by President Obama today. -SKW&mdash; Scott Walker (@ScottWalker) April 12, 2015    The next day, while still in Germany, Walker urged the Obama administration to change longstanding policy and arm the Ukrainian government in its fight against Russian-backed separatists.    It&#39;s time to provide lethal military help to Ukraine so they can defend themselves against Russian aggression. -SKW http://t.co/kRATOGHBoo&mdash; Scott Walker (@ScottWalker) April 13, 2015    On Thursday, Walkers wife, who joined him overseas, signed a tweet from the governors account to his 117,000 followers, attacking Clintons foreign policy reset with Russia.    .@HillaryClinton launches another &quot;reset&quot; while the Russian Defense Minister blames US for violence in Ukraine. - TW http://t.co/P44skE96qX&mdash; Scott Walker (@ScottWalker) April 16, 2015    In an interview published Friday ahead of the European tour, Walker told the Associated Press: Im old school. I believe in that tradition when youre on foreign soil you shouldnt be talking about foreign affairs. Longstanding international etiquette for US politicians travelling overseas tends to cover avoiding direct criticism of current US foreign policy and foreign policymakers, not any discussion of international affairs in general. During Walkers February stop in London, he declined to answer repeated questions about foreign policy: For me, commenting on foreign policy or economic policy in a country where youre a visitor is not the polite thing. Both that trip to the UK and Walkers current visit to Europe were trade missions carried out in his role as Wisconsin governor; the social media posts came from a Twitter account affiliated with his political committee. In response to an inquiry from the Guardian, a Walker aide pointed out that the Wisconsin governor didnt criticize the president. Asked whether the statement attributed to the governor about Clintons perceived continuation of Obamas failed foreign policy could be construed as criticism, the Walker aide, who asked to remain anonymous, was more straightforward: Clearly the intent of that tweet was aimed at Hillary Clintons foreign policy decisions. During her first week on the campaign trail, Clinton has touted her tenure as secretary of state as a strength, even as Republicans have been busy using it as an early line of attack."
"The sheer numbers are compelling. According to a new report from the UN security council, more than 25,000 foreign fighters are taking part in jihadi conflicts, with more and more joining in recent months. They come from more than 100 countries, meaning that half the countries in the world are providing volunteers for groups such as Islamic State and al-Qaida. If the fighting currently raging in Syria and Iraq cannot then be defined as an international, or at least internationalised conflict, it is hard to know what is.   Related: Islamist fighters drawn from half the world's countries, says UN    The international perspective includes not only the composition of the fighting groups, but the perceived risk if and when these ideologically committed and battle-hardened individuals decide to go home. The UN report notes that they pose an immediate and long-term threat, giving credence “ if any were needed “ to the long-standing fears of western intelligence services “ including MI5 and MI6 “ that returning fighters from Syria and Iraq could bring back with them not only a world view inimical to the country whose nationality they bear, but the military training to act in pursuit of their anti-western aims. The report will only increase the pressure on western leaders, starting with Barack Obama, to take more aggressive measures against Isis and other jihadi groups, in the name of both national and international security. The fall of the Iraqi city of Ramadi to Isis forces earlier this month, and the Isis flag now flying above the emblematic Syrian fortress at Palmyra, together precipitated an outpouring of criticism against Obama for passivity while western civilisation burned. His US critics claimed that the US policy of air strikes, in alliance with the Gulf states and others, had been proved to be ineffective. There was now no alternative, they argued, to putting at least some American boots on the ground. Obamas attempt at war by remote-control had failed.    Obama has continued to defend his policy of air strikes only, despite recent Isis victories    In the UK, David Cameron came in for some of the same criticism at the weekend from, among others, the former head of the army, Lord Dannatt, who claimed that air strikes alone could not do the job. He denied that he was any sort of gung-ho general, but called for a parliamentary debate on the dispatch of 5,000 British troops. Almost more telling than the criticism “ mainly, but not exclusively, from former military men “ on both sides of the Atlantic, has been the non-response from political leaders. Obama has continued to defend his policy of air strikes only, despite recent Isis victories “ most recently in an interview in Atlantic magazine, while Cameron lost no time in quashing Lord Dannatts suggestion via his new business secretary, Sajid Javid, who said that Syria and Iraq were not wars on the ground for British troops. Both Obama and Cameron are right. There is no public appetite in either country for new military engagements in the wider Middle East. Past failures are too fresh in the public memory. More to the point, however, is the likely success “ or otherwise “ of any western military escalation. The US defence secretary, Ash Carter, said after the fall of Ramadi that Iraqi troops had shown no will to fight. He may have been too hasty in his judgment; a counter-attack is said to be envisaged. But if the army of Iraq or the variegated rebels in Syria lack the will to win, there is no reason for western forces to support them in a fight they will be unable to sustain. Our resources are better used protecting our own security by tracking the fighters who, for whatever reason, return home."
"Tariq Ali is recalling a party for the late Tony Benn on the House of Commons terrace shortly after Labours 1997 election victory. Edward Miliband, as he was known then, came up to me, eyes shining, very excited, asking: ˜Tariq, what would you do if you had just won? I said: ˜The first thing I would do is to renationalise the railways. Between 70 and 80% of the people want that, it would be very popular. And he rolled his eyes in despair at me. That Milibandian eye roll was, for Ali, a symbolic moment: it typified how the current Labour leader had snapped into line with the Blairite betrayal of the social democratic principles of the party that, under Clement Attlee, had created the NHS and nationalised the commanding heights of the economy “ the very principles that Eds father Ralph Miliband stood for. Indeed, in his introduction to a new collection of Ralph Milibands writing, called Class War Conservatism and Other Essays, Ali quotes his anti-capitalist socialist intellectual friend approvingly on the nature of that betrayal. The failure of social democracy implicates not only those responsible for it, wrote Ralph Miliband. Because of it the path is made smoother for would-be popular saviours, whose extreme conservatism is carefully concealed beneath a demagogic rhetoric of national renewal and social redemption. Ralph Miliband, who died in 1994, did not live to see New Labour in power, still less Ed or David rise through its ministerial ranks, but Tariq Ali suspects he wouldnt have enjoyed the sight. His political views were far removed from those of his sons, and pretending otherwise is foolish, writes Ali. He was extremely close to his sons, proud of their success, as any other migrant refugee would be “ his kids have done well in a foreign land “ but not in a political sense at all. He loathed New Labour and in our last conversation described Blair as ˜Teflon man. Neither he nor his wife, Marion “ an equally strong-minded socialist and feminist “ ever tried to inflict their politics on their kids. Given his short temper, I wonder whether this self-denying ordinance would have survived the Iraq war. I doubt it.     Tariq Ali with Ralph Miliband and Tamara Deutscher in 1989. Photograph: Michael Newman/Merlin Press    Nor did Ralph Miliband live to witness New Labours U-turns over nationalisation. In his new book, The Extreme Centre: A Warning, Ali recalls how, in the early 1990s, John Prescott and Frank Dobson promised to overturn John Majors sell-off of British Rail. Let me make it crystal clear, said Prescott, the future Labour deputy leader, that any privatisation of the railway system that does take place will, on the arrival of a Labour government, be quickly and effectively dealt with ¦ and returned to public ownership. As youll have noticed, that didnt happen. Once in power, New Labour continued the Tories neoliberal agenda. Today, Labour promises public control of the rail network. But it falls some way short of the version of red Ed that is lodged in the popular imagination, and which Ali wishes was a reality. Another source of shame, he writes, came in the spectacle of New Labour ministers celebrat[ing] the partys startling change of register in 1997 by enriching themselves. Theres a section in the book called The Trough, in which Ali lists those new Labour ministers who, after office, profited by advising or serving as directors of firms that benefit from privatisation of healthcare and private finance initiatives. The likes of Alan Milburn, Charles Clarke, Patricia Hewitt and Tony Blair (whose fortune Ali estimates to be between Â£40m and Â£60m) parlayed democratic political office into private fortunes, he contends. The symbiosis of big money and minimalist politics has reached unprecedented heights. The unprincipled U-turns, the grubby symbiosis, and what Ali calls Tweedledum-Tweedledee party politics have alienated the electorate, he argues, and made us feel democracy as practised in Westminster is a peculiarly sick version of what it was supposed to be: rule by and for the people. Ali has a plan to change all that. You cant just wait for something to happen. You have to do something, says the 71-year-old, removing the splendid Red Army sheepskin coat he bought a long time ago in New York for $75, after having pictures taken in the garden of his home in Highgate, north London. I suggest a charter of demands. Try to get a million signatures, starting now in 2015. Then march en masse to parliament and present the demands to the Speaker. Doesnt matter whos in power. He calls it the Grand Remonstrance of the People of England. The last Grand Remonstrance, you may recall, took place on 1 December 1641, when the English parliament presented a list of 204 grievances to Charles I about the way he was running the country. It was followed by civil war and the beheading of the king, and, as one of the greatest history books about that era was entitled, the world turned upside down. Ali is proposing something similar, perhaps minus the beheading. What would his Grand Remonstrance contain? Renationalising the railways and most of the utilities “ gas, water, electricity. Just take them back. Argue with whoever says that cant be done. Cut down military spending, reduce this absurd notion that Britain is a big player on the world stage “ it isnt. Alis initiative is borne of exasperation with the English. Hes tired of contrasting the exciting political cultures of Scotland and Greece, and the Bolivarian social democracies of South America, with the inert English, supine in the face of democratic deficit and neoliberal austerity. Its such a simple idea. I think lots and lots of young people would be interested, and it would unite people who are not engaged in politics, and some who are but dont know what to do. Theres nothing so intolerable to Ali as disengagement: his life has been one of unremitting political enthusiasm. In the 1960s, the Pakistani-born, Oxford-educated leftist writer and film-maker quickly became an iconic figure of the New Left, a writer for the socialist Black Dwarf newspaper, a leading figure in the Trotskyist International Marxist Group, one of the signatories, along with the Beatles, of a petition calling for marijuana to be legalised, and so synonymous with radical demos (such as the one outside the US embassy in London against the Vietnam war in 1968) that he, reportedly, became the inspiration for the Rolling Stones Street Fighting Man. In the 1970s he stood as a Trotskyist candidate for parliament. He has written 20-plus books on history and politics, plus novels and screenplays. When he talks, the left listens.     Vanessa Redgrave and Tariq Ali at an anti-Vietnam war demonstration in London in 1968. Photograph: ITV/Rex    Last year he was in Scotland, and found a political culture north of the border that made him sorrowful that he had the misfortune to live south of it. He argues that England in general, and Westminster in particular, is dominated by what he calls the extreme centre. What does that mean? It is the political system that has grown up under neoliberalism. It has existed in the States for at least a century and a half, where you have two political parties with different clientele but funded by the same source, and basically carrying out the same policies, says Ali. This system has now extended to Europe. Whats extreme about the extreme centre? It backs the American wars and it attacks its own people through austerity. It believes in surveillance on a level we have never seen before, it puts civil liberties under threat, it renditions people “ a polite word meaning that people are kidnapped and handed over for torture. People talk about the extreme left and the extreme right, but the real danger today is from the extreme centre. Such policies are partially responsible for the terrorist attacks in Paris and Copenhagen, the rise of Islamophobia and antisemitism, he argues. State security services know this better than our political leaders. Did you know more young Muslims are employed by the state security services in Britain, France and Germany than work for al-Qaida and Isis? So they must give the security services a pretty good image of what the mood in the community is “ and they say again and again that the reason for this radicalisation is the wars Britain and the US are fighting in the Muslim world You go out and fight wars and commit brutalities that make individual terrorist brutalities pale by comparison. How can you expect people not to be radicalised? They have no other way of expressing their anger. And they become terrorists. A few days after our interview, I email Ali to ask him about the killings in Copenhagen. What prompted a radical Muslim to kill a participant at a free speech debate and a guard at a synagogue? Ali responds quickly: Am in the States, where Copenhagen is overshadowed by the Chapel Hill killings [the murder of three Muslim students in North Carolina earlier this month]. A non-religious fundo kills three Muslim students. A jihadi known to Danish intelligence does his business. The violence springs from the chaos of a disordered world. Perhaps unsurprisingly, there are no Je suis Charlie stickers on the windows of Alis Highgate home. Heroising the murdered Charlie Hebdo staff, as French president FranÃ§ois Hollande did, is inimical to Ali. I knew the magazine in the late 60s, and it was very radical “ they were banned by the French government for making fun of De Gaulle the day after he died. In the 80s it had become a stale magazine, and people have told me that one reason for attacking the Muslims and reprinting the Danish cartoons was to boost circulation. He argues that Je suis Charlie stickers express something other than support for freedom of expression and condemnation of those who murdered in the name of Islam “ a loathing for Muslims. Why, then, does he think Islamophobia, if thats what it is, is on the rise in Europe? This is a very straightforward example of finding scapegoats because you dont want to admit that what youre doing is partially responsible. And those he thinks partially responsible for the rise in Islamist terrorism in Europe are the politicians of the extreme centre. Ali cites a recent article in French magazine Le Nouvel Observateur, in which one of Charlie Hebdos founders, Henri Roussel, contended that French foreign policy is largely to blame for the attack on the magazine. Ali agrees: Hollande makes wars in countries where he doesnt need to, to replace someone whos bad with someone whos equally bad. You see this in Libya, you see this in Syria, you see this with Isis. As in France, so in Britain. It follows that one reason Ali favours a Grand Remonstrance is to create a mass movement in England that would emulate what Syriza has done in Greece and Podemos in Spain “ thereby taking on the the extreme centre and revivifying democratic politics. Its from such grassroots movements that Tariq Ali hopes that the extreme centre will be destroyed. He certainly has no hope that the general election will do much but change Tweedledum for Tweedledee. Thats why young people around the country arent voting, and why people such as Russell Brand have an appeal. Younger people have been disabused of tribal loyalties to party that are more likely to afflict older people. Hell be voting Green. Why? Because the Green candidate here is an old comrade from the 60s, a trade union activist, anti-war, rock solid on most issues. Why should I bother voting for anyone else? He expects Ed Miliband to form the next government, but, because Labour is likely to be trounced in Scotland (the SNP may well get 80% of the Scottish vote, so Labour heartlands like Glasgow will fall to them), Ali reckons Miliband will only be able to do so with support from another party. But neither the SNP nor the LibDems, the most likely coalition partners, would be easy for Miliband to work with: Labour spent last year bitterly campaigning against the former, and has spent the past five years denouncing the collaboration of the latter with the Tories governmental austerity policies. In any case, its not going to be back to politics as normal. Just before we finish, Ali tells me of something that made him despair in London recently: the sight of union jacks flying at half-mast after the Saudi king died. That was Britain on its knees before big money. It was grotesque and so plain and simple. Perhaps it was, but many didnt even notice them, still less understand whose death was being mourned and the ritual abasement the lowered flags symbolised. If Ali wants to awaken England from its apolitical slumbers, he has his work cut out. ¢ The Extreme Centre is published by Verso at Â£7.99. Buy it for Â£6.39 at bookshop.theguardian.com ¢ This article was amended on 23 February 2015 to correct a picture caption. An earlier version said the photo showed Tariq Ali with Marion and Ralph Miliband. The woman pictured is Tamara Deutscher."
"In the latest CIA coup, America's leading spooks have sent the Twittersphere into a frenzy with their chucklesome debut on social media: ""We can neither confirm nor deny that this is our first tweet."" How droll! More than a quarter of a million people have retweeted what has been described as ""the best first tweet possible"". No wonder: it's one of the world's most secretive organisations being self-deprecating, light-hearted, even “ dare I say it? “ cute.Here's a story that isn't quite so cute. My parents were among many South Yorkshire families who took in refugees fleeing Augusto Pinochet's Chile in the 1970s. Sylvia was a Chilean woman with two kids. Her husband had been murdered, she had been tortured and “ traumatised “ she would end her life by jumping from a Sheffield tower block.Here was just one victim of a junta installed on 11 September 1973 with CIA support after Henry Kissinger declared: ""I don't see why we need to stand by and watch a country go communist due to the irresponsibility of its people."" Dissidents had electrodes attached to their genitals. Thousands were killed, including those crammed into Santiago's National Stadium; among then was Victor Jara “ Latin America's answer to Bob Dylan. This was the other 9/11, and the CIA's fingerprints were all over it.But, judging from the reaction to the new-look CIA, the punters are taking a different view. ""A good example of how even the most serious of organisations can use a light touch successfully on social media,"" applauded the Liberal Democrat activist Mark Pack. ""The CIA have managed, with one tweet, to do what millions of PR dollars could not,"" suggested another Twitter user.Of course, the CIA is far from alone in trying to lighten up its image: PR offensives are all the rage among tyrants, too. Are you a bloodstained despot who wants to polish your sullied reputation? Your first port of call is surely Bell Pottinger, run by Thatcher's publicity guru, Lord Bell. The dictatorships of Bahrain and Belarus, the Syrian dictator's wife, Pinochet himself “ all have had their reputations spruced up by the firm. Its services include cleaning up those embarrassing Wikipedia articles and Google search results. Kazakhstan's pro-western dictator, Nursultan Nazarbayev “ who locks up dissidents and massacres striking oil workers “ is a pro at PR campaigns, hiring Tony Blair at vast expense. The Burmese junta hasn't hired Blair, but its ""new Burma"" rebrand is very New Labour. Equatorial Guinea's dictator ropes in Hollywood stars, pop stars and other celebs to distract from torture, arbitrary detention and execution.The CIA might try and LOL away its record, but given the world is still dealing with the consequences of its many disastrous postwar interventions, it shouldn't be allowed to get away with it. ""Terrorism"" is normally used when referring to acts of violence committed by non-white people hostile to the west. But if we're understanding the term to mean acts of terror committed for political ends, then the CIA is surely the greatest terrorist organisation on earth.Last year, days after the Assad regime's heinous gas attacks had killed hundreds, it was revealed that the CIA had helped Saddam Hussein with his own chemical weapons slaughter in 1988. Fearful of an imminent military breakthrough by Iran, the agency passed on Iranian troop positions to the Iraqi tyrant, ""fully aware that Hussein's military would attack with chemical weapons, including sarin"". As a former US military attache to Baghdad put it: ""The Iraqis never told us that they intended to use nerve gas. They didn't have to. We already knew.""The CIA's catastrophic involvement in Iraq goes back much further. In 1963 Saddam's Ba'ath party violently deposed the leftist administration of Abd al-Karim Qasim, slaughtering thousands of communists with the help of lists provided courtesy of the CIA. ""We came to power on a CIA train,"" boasted Al Saleh Sa'adi, the new regime's interior minister. Today, Iraq lies shattered and bloodied.Handing out lists of dissidents to tyrants was a CIA speciality. In 1965, Indonesia was home to the world's largest non-ruling communist party. Fearful that the country was slipping into the communist axis, the CIA supplied the coup leader General Suharto and his goons with names of leftists. Up to a million were slaughtered with guns and machetes; the countryside was littered with rotting corpses, and rivers were tinged red with blood. It was ""one of the worst mass murders of the 20th century"", according to an internal CIA report.Iran is possibly the definitive example of CIA operations blowing up in the face of the US. In 1953 the agency “ along with Britain's MI6 “ orchestrated the overthrow of the democratically elected social reformer Prime Minister Mohammad Mossadeq after he attempted to nationalise the country's oil industry. The coup ""was carried out under CIA direction as an act of US foreign policy"", as the CIA put it recently. Mossadeq was replaced by the repressive shah: no wonder, then, that after the overthrow of this CIA stooge the new regime was so virulently anti-western. The entire region still lives with the aftermath.And Afghanistan still suffers the consequences of the CIA's lavish support for mujahideen fighters engaged in armed struggle with the Soviets in the 1980s.The charge sheet is frighteningly long. The CIA's Phoenix programme in Vietnam killed tens of thousands between 1965 and 1972. CIA-backed coups in Brazil, the Dominican Republic and Bolivia; CIA-backed death squads in Guatemala, Nicaragua and El Salvador; the murder of Patrice Lumumba, Congo's first democratically elected leader, in 1961 “ the tragic preamble to decades of war and dictatorship that has killed millions. Neither can all this be dismissed as the unfortunate acts of a bygone era. The CIA has questions to answer about its involvement in the abortive 2002 coup against Venezuela's Hugo ChÃ¡vez.The agency's first tweet provoked the New York Review of Books to launch a Twitter war, exposing the CIA's recent record. The CIA had interfered with a recent Senate investigation into torture, the magazine pointed out, in CIA secret prisons established by President Bush. CIA operatives were given clearance to deprive suspects of sleep, slam them against walls, and use waterboarding and other forms of torture.It's in the CIA's interests to craft a cuddly new image: as a team of glamorous, James Bond-style spooks who can take a joke. Given the abject failure of much of the western media to scrutinise its actions “ at least until it's too late “ it may believe it can get away with it. But its record of torture, murder and subverting democratic governments speaks for itself. However savvy its Twitter campaign, that must not be forgotten.Twitter: @OwenJones84¢ The third paragraph of this article was amended on 9 June. Henry Kissinger was referring to a country, not a county."
"On the day when parliament reassembled this week, David Cameron said something so arresting to MPs about the jihadi threat from the Islamic caliphate that I had to go away and check it in Hansard the next day. But Cameron had indeed said exactly what I thought I heard him say.Here's what he said: ""On Friday, the independent joint terrorism analysis centre increased the threat level in the UK from substantial to severe, and we now believe that at least 500 people have travelled from Britain to fight in the region, in addition to 700 from France, 400 from Germany and hundreds more from countries including America, Canada, Austria, Denmark, Spain, Sweden, Belgium, the Netherlands and Australia."" The bit about the threat level got all the coverage. The bit about the jihadis was rarely quoted.Everyone is familiar with the very British bad habit of sometimes talking about global threats as though the UK is uniquely vulnerable to them. It's a habit that is often given a specially solipsistic thrust by the British media's tendency to hysteria. Immigration, for example, has long been treated in this way. It's&nbsp;always all about us.Something similar also occurs when the spotlight falls on jihadi terrorism. The murder of James Foley set off a massive bout of soul-searching, which is still going on this week and which has now been given fresh impetus by the murder of Steven Sotloff and the confirmation that the so-called caliphate has British hostages in its cells too.But the British soul-searching about jihadis is just as solipsistic as the argument about migration. The current focus is all on the threat to Britain from returnees and on the involvement in the desert conflict of British Muslims such as the man absurdly dubbed Jihadi John. The revelation that there is now at least one British hostage in Isis hands will only reinforce this narrative. Wednesday's prime minister's questions focused overwhelmingly on this. The&nbsp;poor old Middle East thus gets treated almost as an afterthought. The rest of the world barely rates a moment's attention.Yet Cameron's figures were the bit that should make us all sit up. Yes, the fact that 500 mad, bad and alienated British Muslims have headed out to Syria and Iraq is exceptionally serious. Yes, their return is a threat against which we must guard. Yes, the stream of radicalisation that led to it needs to be dammed. Yes, the state should prevent the jihadis from blowing us up in our shopping centres and trains or from beheading us on our own streets. That's precisely what the state exists to do.But the jihadist threat isn't a uniquely British problem. As Cameron's figures show so powerfully, it's a shared one. The jihadi numbers are even greater in France and almost as large in Germany. Then there's the ""hundreds more"" from the other countries that Cameron listed. Put it all together and Europe has nurtured a minimum of a couple of thousand jihadi vipers in its collective bosom, of whom possibly no more than a quarter are British. Bad enough, yes, but definitely not the whole story.Let us be clear about what this implies in relation to the Iraq war. If today's eruption of jihadism was fundamentally about retribution for the Iraq war, then you would not expect many of the jihadis to come from France, which so spectacularly refused to join the US and UK in toppling Saddam Hussein in 2003. Nor from Germany, which proudly sent no forces to Iraq. Nor from any of the other countries in Cameron's list other than the US and Australia. The Iraq war was wrong. It has helped to facilitate the jihadism. But this isn't about the Iraq war now. It's the jihadis who are to blame, not Tony Blair.It is time, in other words, to cooperate&nbsp;with others and treat the jihadi caliphate as what it actually is. It is a real threat, a horrible one, above all to the people of the region, but also to any state and anyone it thinks it can attack “ which definitely includes Britain. It&nbsp;has to be stopped, pushed back, broken up and generally disrupted by nations acting together. Britain has a role in this, which it would be irresponsible not to play. But&nbsp;the key issue for Britain is the nature of that role.The proximity of the general election gives all of this an extra political charge. It is central to Cameron's election strategy to show himself as a strong leader whom it would be risky to replace with Ed Miliband. The temptation to make sweeping pre-election promises to act tough, banish undesirables, remove rights and rough up the lawyers and judges is doubtless very strong, especially with Ukip menacing the Tory vote. Yet give Cameron his due. Although he often talks a bigger game than he can play, he is not a leader with messianic tendencies. Give the Liberal Democrats their due too “ they have stood up for the rule of law and blocked some of the more reckless Tory ideas.Cameron used some good words this week. The approach should be ""tough, intelligent, patient and comprehensive"". That ought to mean studying and learning about the threat, doing focused and proportionate things that work, doing them with others, often keeping ourselves in the background, doing them forcefully but avoiding doing unnecessary harm, and sticking stubbornly to the task, frequently working in secret. It&nbsp;means the security services and special forces are bound to be near the heart of this, however problematic that may be. But that's better than leading the charge in a military conflict. And it is better than doing clumsily repressive things at home that could be recruiting sergeants for new jihadis.In fact, with occasional false starts and much grinding of gears, this may be the approach towards which the UK government is finding its way. The appetite for playing a big military role is limited, as is the UK's ability to do so. These are tests of the great alliances and international institutions, not of Britain alone.But Cameron's instinct for action against the caliphate is right. At home, the initial enthusiasm for removing UK jihadis' citizenships and passports has now run up against legal realities and obligations that cannot simply be wished away. But there will be tough decisions all the same. Even without any new anti-terrorism powers, the returning jihadis will face prosecutions of some kind. And those 2,000 young jihadis are potentially 2,000 more life prisoners in the jails of Europe, ours included, for decades to come."
"Unmanned RAF aerial drones armed with Hellfire missiles have been patrolling the skies over Syria for months seeking to target British jihadis on a kill list drawn up by senior ministers on the UK National Security Council shortly after the election.   Related: The Guardian view on Britains Syria drone strikes: nastiness evident, necessity unproven | Editorial    As the defence secretary Michael Fallon said ministers would not hesitate to approve further strikes against jihadis who have their own kill list, Jeremy Corbyn led a cross-party group of MPs who raised doubts about the change in strategy. Corbyn said: There has to be a legal basis for whats going on. This is war without parliamentary approval. And in fact parliament specifically said no to this war in September 2013. Senior Liberal Democrats suggested that the RAF drone strike, which led to the killing of two British Islamic State members on 21 August, went beyond anything that would have been approved when Nick Clegg sat on the NSC. The hawks have been let loose and are trying to test the boundaries of what is possible, one former Lib Dem coalition source said. Their comments came after it emerged that the kill list with the names of several British jihadis was drawn up at a meeting of senior NSC members, chaired by David Cameron, which approved the drone strike in Syria. It is understood that the kill list includes Mohammed Emwazi who is believed to be the extremist in several Islamic State videos filmed beheading captives.      Mohammed Emwazi, who is believed to be on the ˜kill list of UK jihadis. Photograph: The Guardian    The Guardian understands that the government, which had previously said that unarmed RAF drones were patrolling the skies of Syria to gather intelligence on Isis targets, approved the arming of the drones following the May general election, which was won by the Conservatives.  Pilots flying the drones from RAF Waddington in Lincolnshire sought out targets on the kill list months before the strikes but held back to avoid causing civilian casualties. The prime minister told MPs on Monday that Reyaad Khan was killed in an airstrike on 21 August as he travelled in a vehicle near Raqqah in Syria. Ruhul Amin, an Isis associate, was also killed. Junaid Hussain, another Briton, was killed in a US airstrike three days later as part of a joint operation after intelligence suggested that Khan and Hussain had been plotting to attack the VJ Day ceremony, presided over by the Queen on 15 August, and an Armed Forces Day ceremony to mark the death of Lee Rigby. Fallon indicated that the government was preparing the ground for further attacks when he accused Isis of having its own kill list. He told Good Morning Britain on ITV1: They have a kill list, they have plans to mount a series of attacks on Britain and our job is to identify those attacks identify, the terrorists and where we can forestall them.  But if youre asking me would we hesitate to take similar action again today, tomorrow, next week, absolutely not, we would not hesitate.     RAF Reaper drones armed with Hellfire missiles are in the skies above Syria. Photograph: Cpl Steve Bain/Ministry of Defence/Press Association    The defence secretary said the strikes, which were approved by the attorney general Jeremy Wright, were legal and planned with meticulous care. He added: Im relieved with the action we took that we were able to disrupt this kind of terrorist plotting. We set out the rules of engagement.  For an attack like this, it was meticulously planned, it didnt happen overnight, it involved hours of surveillance and a great deal of planning to comply with the rules of engagement that we set that there should be no civilian casualties or other damage. This attack was successfully carried out and I think we owe a debt of gratitude to those who did it to help keep our country safe. The drone strikes are likely to be investigated by parliaments intelligence and security committee, whose membership is likely to be announced by the prime minister on Wednesday.    Related: How UK government decided to kill Reyaad Khan    The announcement will be made after a warning from senior Labour figures that the three former Labour ministers nominated by Harriet Harman to sit on the committee “ Gisela Stuart, George Howarth and Fiona Mactaggart “ could be replaced by Jeremy Corbyn. Keith Simpson, a former parliamentary aide to William Hague, and Mark Field head the Tory nominations. Angus Robertson, the SNP leader at Westminster, is also tipped to join the committee. The ISC would have access to the intelligence that persuaded ministers to order the drone strike that killed the British citizens. Downing Street insists that the drone strikes are designed to achieve one or both of two objectives “ to disrupt attacks on British soil and to prevent attacks on British citizens in the UK or abroad. The attacks would not be approved as punishment for an attack.           Michael Fallon talks about the prospect of further drone strikes in Syria.    But the committee members may ask whether the prime ministers decision to approve the first aerial drone strike on a UK citizen outside a formal conflict marks a change of strategy.  The prime minister said in the last parliament that he would seek the approval of MPs before extending airstrikes against Isis targets from Iraq to Syria. But he always reserved the right to launch military action without parliamentary approval in the event of an emergency “ a standard position approved by Nick Clegg.   Related: Human rights group brings legal action against government over drone strike    However, Lib Dem sources suggested that the drone strikes last month marked a shift in strategy. One source recalled David Cameron shutting down Iain Duncan Smith at a cabinet meeting when he suggested bypassing parliament to launch airstrikes. David Davis, the former shadow home secretary, raised concerns about the kill list.  He said: They appear to have now a kill list policy. The implication of that is that there is an explicit policy to do it which is a major change from anything we have done previously. It does look unfortunately like the US policy which is ill considered.  Frankly, if such a policy exists they really ought to come to the house and report on it. They can perfectly properly turn round and say we are not going to comment on individual cases. But actually the principle of what they are doing is a matter the house should consider."
"Unmanned RAF aerial drones armed with Hellfire missiles have been patrolling the skies over Syria for months seeking to target British jihadis on a kill list drawn up by senior ministers on the UK National Security Council shortly after the election.   Related: The Guardian view on Britains Syria drone strikes: nastiness evident, necessity unproven | Editorial    As the defence secretary Michael Fallon said ministers would not hesitate to approve further strikes against jihadis who have their own kill list, Jeremy Corbyn led a cross-party group of MPs who raised doubts about the change in strategy. Corbyn said: There has to be a legal basis for whats going on. This is war without parliamentary approval. And in fact parliament specifically said no to this war in September 2013. Senior Liberal Democrats suggested that the RAF drone strike, which led to the killing of two British Islamic State members on 21 August, went beyond anything that would have been approved when Nick Clegg sat on the NSC. The hawks have been let loose and are trying to test the boundaries of what is possible, one former Lib Dem coalition source said. Their comments came after it emerged that the kill list with the names of several British jihadis was drawn up at a meeting of senior NSC members, chaired by David Cameron, which approved the drone strike in Syria. It is understood that the kill list includes Mohammed Emwazi who is believed to be the extremist in several Islamic State videos filmed beheading captives.      Mohammed Emwazi, who is believed to be on the ˜kill list of UK jihadis. Photograph: The Guardian    The Guardian understands that the government, which had previously said that unarmed RAF drones were patrolling the skies of Syria to gather intelligence on Isis targets, approved the arming of the drones following the May general election, which was won by the Conservatives.  Pilots flying the drones from RAF Waddington in Lincolnshire sought out targets on the kill list months before the strikes but held back to avoid causing civilian casualties. The prime minister told MPs on Monday that Reyaad Khan was killed in an airstrike on 21 August as he travelled in a vehicle near Raqqah in Syria. Ruhul Amin, an Isis associate, was also killed. Junaid Hussain, another Briton, was killed in a US airstrike three days later as part of a joint operation after intelligence suggested that Khan and Hussain had been plotting to attack the VJ Day ceremony, presided over by the Queen on 15 August, and an Armed Forces Day ceremony to mark the death of Lee Rigby. Fallon indicated that the government was preparing the ground for further attacks when he accused Isis of having its own kill list. He told Good Morning Britain on ITV1: They have a kill list, they have plans to mount a series of attacks on Britain and our job is to identify those attacks identify, the terrorists and where we can forestall them.  But if youre asking me would we hesitate to take similar action again today, tomorrow, next week, absolutely not, we would not hesitate.     RAF Reaper drones armed with Hellfire missiles are in the skies above Syria. Photograph: Cpl Steve Bain/Ministry of Defence/Press Association    The defence secretary said the strikes, which were approved by the attorney general Jeremy Wright, were legal and planned with meticulous care. He added: Im relieved with the action we took that we were able to disrupt this kind of terrorist plotting. We set out the rules of engagement.  For an attack like this, it was meticulously planned, it didnt happen overnight, it involved hours of surveillance and a great deal of planning to comply with the rules of engagement that we set that there should be no civilian casualties or other damage. This attack was successfully carried out and I think we owe a debt of gratitude to those who did it to help keep our country safe. The drone strikes are likely to be investigated by parliaments intelligence and security committee, whose membership is likely to be announced by the prime minister on Wednesday.    Related: How UK government decided to kill Reyaad Khan    The announcement will be made after a warning from senior Labour figures that the three former Labour ministers nominated by Harriet Harman to sit on the committee “ Gisela Stuart, George Howarth and Fiona Mactaggart “ could be replaced by Jeremy Corbyn. Keith Simpson, a former parliamentary aide to William Hague, and Mark Field head the Tory nominations. Angus Robertson, the SNP leader at Westminster, is also tipped to join the committee. The ISC would have access to the intelligence that persuaded ministers to order the drone strike that killed the British citizens. Downing Street insists that the drone strikes are designed to achieve one or both of two objectives “ to disrupt attacks on British soil and to prevent attacks on British citizens in the UK or abroad. The attacks would not be approved as punishment for an attack.           Michael Fallon talks about the prospect of further drone strikes in Syria.    But the committee members may ask whether the prime ministers decision to approve the first aerial drone strike on a UK citizen outside a formal conflict marks a change of strategy.  The prime minister said in the last parliament that he would seek the approval of MPs before extending airstrikes against Isis targets from Iraq to Syria. But he always reserved the right to launch military action without parliamentary approval in the event of an emergency “ a standard position approved by Nick Clegg.   Related: Human rights group brings legal action against government over drone strike    However, Lib Dem sources suggested that the drone strikes last month marked a shift in strategy. One source recalled David Cameron shutting down Iain Duncan Smith at a cabinet meeting when he suggested bypassing parliament to launch airstrikes. David Davis, the former shadow home secretary, raised concerns about the kill list.  He said: They appear to have now a kill list policy. The implication of that is that there is an explicit policy to do it which is a major change from anything we have done previously. It does look unfortunately like the US policy which is ill considered.  Frankly, if such a policy exists they really ought to come to the house and report on it. They can perfectly properly turn round and say we are not going to comment on individual cases. But actually the principle of what they are doing is a matter the house should consider."
"Unmanned RAF aerial drones armed with Hellfire missiles have been patrolling the skies over Syria for months seeking to target British jihadis on a kill list drawn up by senior ministers on the UK National Security Council shortly after the election.   Related: The Guardian view on Britains Syria drone strikes: nastiness evident, necessity unproven | Editorial    As the defence secretary Michael Fallon said ministers would not hesitate to approve further strikes against jihadis who have their own kill list, Jeremy Corbyn led a cross-party group of MPs who raised doubts about the change in strategy. Corbyn said: There has to be a legal basis for whats going on. This is war without parliamentary approval. And in fact parliament specifically said no to this war in September 2013. Senior Liberal Democrats suggested that the RAF drone strike, which led to the killing of two British Islamic State members on 21 August, went beyond anything that would have been approved when Nick Clegg sat on the NSC. The hawks have been let loose and are trying to test the boundaries of what is possible, one former Lib Dem coalition source said. Their comments came after it emerged that the kill list with the names of several British jihadis was drawn up at a meeting of senior NSC members, chaired by David Cameron, which approved the drone strike in Syria. It is understood that the kill list includes Mohammed Emwazi who is believed to be the extremist in several Islamic State videos filmed beheading captives.      Mohammed Emwazi, who is believed to be on the ˜kill list of UK jihadis. Photograph: The Guardian    The Guardian understands that the government, which had previously said that unarmed RAF drones were patrolling the skies of Syria to gather intelligence on Isis targets, approved the arming of the drones following the May general election, which was won by the Conservatives.  Pilots flying the drones from RAF Waddington in Lincolnshire sought out targets on the kill list months before the strikes but held back to avoid causing civilian casualties. The prime minister told MPs on Monday that Reyaad Khan was killed in an airstrike on 21 August as he travelled in a vehicle near Raqqah in Syria. Ruhul Amin, an Isis associate, was also killed. Junaid Hussain, another Briton, was killed in a US airstrike three days later as part of a joint operation after intelligence suggested that Khan and Hussain had been plotting to attack the VJ Day ceremony, presided over by the Queen on 15 August, and an Armed Forces Day ceremony to mark the death of Lee Rigby. Fallon indicated that the government was preparing the ground for further attacks when he accused Isis of having its own kill list. He told Good Morning Britain on ITV1: They have a kill list, they have plans to mount a series of attacks on Britain and our job is to identify those attacks identify, the terrorists and where we can forestall them.  But if youre asking me would we hesitate to take similar action again today, tomorrow, next week, absolutely not, we would not hesitate.     RAF Reaper drones armed with Hellfire missiles are in the skies above Syria. Photograph: Cpl Steve Bain/Ministry of Defence/Press Association    The defence secretary said the strikes, which were approved by the attorney general Jeremy Wright, were legal and planned with meticulous care. He added: Im relieved with the action we took that we were able to disrupt this kind of terrorist plotting. We set out the rules of engagement.  For an attack like this, it was meticulously planned, it didnt happen overnight, it involved hours of surveillance and a great deal of planning to comply with the rules of engagement that we set that there should be no civilian casualties or other damage. This attack was successfully carried out and I think we owe a debt of gratitude to those who did it to help keep our country safe. The drone strikes are likely to be investigated by parliaments intelligence and security committee, whose membership is likely to be announced by the prime minister on Wednesday.    Related: How UK government decided to kill Reyaad Khan    The announcement will be made after a warning from senior Labour figures that the three former Labour ministers nominated by Harriet Harman to sit on the committee “ Gisela Stuart, George Howarth and Fiona Mactaggart “ could be replaced by Jeremy Corbyn. Keith Simpson, a former parliamentary aide to William Hague, and Mark Field head the Tory nominations. Angus Robertson, the SNP leader at Westminster, is also tipped to join the committee. The ISC would have access to the intelligence that persuaded ministers to order the drone strike that killed the British citizens. Downing Street insists that the drone strikes are designed to achieve one or both of two objectives “ to disrupt attacks on British soil and to prevent attacks on British citizens in the UK or abroad. The attacks would not be approved as punishment for an attack.           Michael Fallon talks about the prospect of further drone strikes in Syria.    But the committee members may ask whether the prime ministers decision to approve the first aerial drone strike on a UK citizen outside a formal conflict marks a change of strategy.  The prime minister said in the last parliament that he would seek the approval of MPs before extending airstrikes against Isis targets from Iraq to Syria. But he always reserved the right to launch military action without parliamentary approval in the event of an emergency “ a standard position approved by Nick Clegg.   Related: Human rights group brings legal action against government over drone strike    However, Lib Dem sources suggested that the drone strikes last month marked a shift in strategy. One source recalled David Cameron shutting down Iain Duncan Smith at a cabinet meeting when he suggested bypassing parliament to launch airstrikes. David Davis, the former shadow home secretary, raised concerns about the kill list.  He said: They appear to have now a kill list policy. The implication of that is that there is an explicit policy to do it which is a major change from anything we have done previously. It does look unfortunately like the US policy which is ill considered.  Frankly, if such a policy exists they really ought to come to the house and report on it. They can perfectly properly turn round and say we are not going to comment on individual cases. But actually the principle of what they are doing is a matter the house should consider."
"Tony Abbott has left the door open to increasing the number of Australian special forces soldiers positioned in Iraq, saying he remains in talks with the United States and coalition partners about what we can usefully do. The prime minister did not rule out an increase to the 200 special forces soldiers tasked with advising, assisting and training the Iraqi military in the fight against Islamic State (Isis). Australias existing commitment includes the use of Super Hornet fighter jets in coalition air strikes in Iraq, with these operations supported by 400 air force personnel. During a visit to the United Arab Emirates (UAE) on Monday, Abbott said the Australian Defence Force was helping Iraqi security forces to be more effective, thereby improving the safety of the Iraqi people. Asked by a journalist whether he could rule out sending in more special forces soldiers or increasing other military assistance, Abbott said: Well, I certainly dont rule out doing what we reasonably can to make the world a safer place, because our military forces here in the Middle East are protecting our interests at home as much as theyre protecting our interests and our values abroad. I look forward to continuing to talk to the Iraqis, to the Americans, to our partners here in the Gulf about what we can usefully do as a nation and as a coalition partner to make the world a safer place and to make Australia a safer country. Abbotts visit to the UAE followed his trip to Iraq on Sunday, during which he met special forces operating at Baghdad international airport and in Anbar province and spoke to the Iraqi prime minister, Haider al-Abadi. Abbott defended the exclusion of Australian media from the Iraq visit, after criticism from the opposition about the governments culture of secrecy. Official footage of the events, including a press conference with al-Abadi, was instead distributed to Australian media by Abbotts office. Well, the last thing any politician wants to do is to prevent media coverage of a visit to our troops, Abbott told reporters in the UAE. Its profoundly implausible that any Australian prime minister would want to have a secret visit to Australian troops and, plainly, there was footage released of everything that I did yesterday, but for understandable security reasons it is difficult to get people into Iraq at the moment and it was for security reasons that I was unable to take local media in. But as you know, Australian media have followed me around at every step today and I understand that Australian media will follow me around tomorrow and, obviously, its good to have Australian media here to cover the work of Australian military personnel here in the Middle East. Abbott told al-Abadi on Sunday that Australia was determined to deepen our cooperation with the government and the people of Iraq in the weeks and months to come. In November, Barack Obama indicated he might ask for further commitments from coalition partners involved in the efforts to degrade and destroy Isis. Following a bilateral meeting with Abbott at the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit in Beijing, the US president said he was having conversations with Australia and other coalition partners that are already committed to putting trainers in, to see how they can supplement and work with us in this overall effort. Isis has proven resilient and remains a threat despite recent military operations against it in Syria and Iraq, according to a brief of evidence compiled by the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation. The agency provided the assessment as part of the process of declaring al-Raqqa province in Syria as the first no-go zone for Australians under the governments new foreign fighter laws."
"Last week, Islamic State militants released a fifth video of the British freelance journalist John Cantlie, wearing a GuantÃ¡namo Bay-style orange jumpsuit and appearing to read from a script. The films release was widely reported. Unsurprisingly: since August, Isis has released videos showing its beheading of two American journalists, James Foley and Steven Sotloff, as well as two British aid workers, David Haines and Alan Henning. All have been huge news events. Less widely covered were reports that, on 13 October, Isis shot and killed the Mosul correspondent of Iraqs Sada news agency in the citys al-Ghazlani camp. Several local sources, as well as a Kurdish Democratic party spokesman and a medical centre, confirmed Mohanad al-Aqidis death to numerous NGOs (members of his family have since disputed the reports, and al-Aqidis fate is currently unclear.) There are no doubts about the public beheading on 10 October, in Samarra, 50km south-east of Tikrit, of Raad Mohamed al-Azaoui , an Iraqi cameraman and photographer for Sama Salah Aldeen TV. Azaoui, a 37-year-old father of three, was killed with his brother after Friday prayers. Isis had previously threatened him with execution because he refused to cooperate: in the territories it controls, the group demands media workers swear allegiance to Isis, refer to it by its official name, do no interviews for TV and send all reports for pre-approval by its media office. The French organisation Journalists without Borders (RSF) says most local and regional TV stations have now stopped working in Isis-occupied territory as many of their employees have been either arrested, abducted or personally threatened. But at least 17 Iraqi journalists have been killed in the past 10 months, RSF says, including four since the offensive in northern Iraq was launched in June. In Mosul and Salahuddin, Isis has publicly threatened nine by name, demanding they stop working and join Isis, or face execution. In Syria, according to the New York-based Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ), Isis executed freelance cameraman Yasser Faisal al-Jumaili in Idlib in December last year. CPJ says more than 80 journalists have been kidnapped in Syria since 2011, and puts at approximately 20 “ overwhelmingly Syrian “ the number now held by Isis, with no certainty as to their fate. They include a photographer, a correspondent and a broadcast and assistant engineer from Orient TV, a journalist for Radio ANA and a Shahba Press correspondent. RSF also names a presenter for Syria al-Shaab TV; a freelance journalist for Radio Rozana; two reporters from the Azaz Media Center; an al-Fida cartoonist and an independent journalist and writer. Of these journalists “ neither American, nor European, nor the subject of a sick Isis promo video “ we do not, generally, hear much."
"As the refugee crisis across Europe continues and Syrian civil war drags on, it seems the only solution western politicians can muster for the conflict is to send more weapons for various fighters, drop more bombs from the sky and argue for a more entrenched war “ actions that will all but guarantee to further descend the region into chaos. The UK, France and Australia have already announced plans in recent weeks to start bombing Isis-controlled sections of Syria in response to the refugee crisis (theyve failed to explain how dropping more bombs on an already-devastated country will cause fewer refugees rather than more). The US has military special forces units already fighting on the ground in Syria sans any debate from Congress or in the public arena, either from the current administration or any of the presidential candidates. And now, fresh off his widely mocked suggestion that the US should be arming moderate members of al-Qaeda to defeat Isis in Syria, David Petraeus testified in front of Congress on Tuesday about other potential solutions to the Syria tragedy which, make no mistake, would require untold billions of dollars of military spending and tens of thousands of US troops. As the Guardians Spencer Ackerman reported:  [Petraeus] argued “ in contradiction to the views of Central Command chief Lloyd Austin “ that the US military ought to patrol a corridor by air to create a safe zone for Syrian civilians, partly as a staging ground for a Syrian opposition to fight both Assad and Isis, one that includes Syrians who do not take part in the shaky US initiative to train and equip so-called moderate fighters.  Sure, everyone would like a safe zone for Syrians who are trying to flee their worn torn land in the fight between the brutal Assad regime and the barbaric Isis. But rarely does anyone ask any questions about what, exactly, that would entail. If youre going to carve out a slice of land in Syria, it requires, at minimum, setting up a no-fly zone, and as journalist Adam Johnson explained last week, theres never been a no-fly zone in modern history that hasnt led to an actual war, given it usually requires destroying the air force of the country its set up in. Even if we were to avoid going to active war against Assads forces (against all odds), everyone seems to ignore the fact that a no-fly zone will reportedly require 70,000 US troops. And that number is not an exaggeration “ it comes from the Joint Chiefs of Staff and has been cited in the past as the number needed to secure the entire countrys skies. If it would take 70,000 troops for the whole country, its safe to assume even breaking off a portion of it would include tens of thousands of American personnel. And how you can possibly secure a large swath of land in a country, which in various places is controlled by Assad or Isis, without a significant amount of ground forces to secure and protect the region beyond just air strikes is never explained either. So if a safe zone is what the US wants, then untold number of US troops on the ground in Syria is what theyll get. Sadly, the calls for a US military escalation will only get louder, as various Republican war mongers hog the stage during the high-profile Republican campaign. And the leading candidate for the Democratic nomination, Hillary Clinton, is as hawkish, or more so, than Republicans. Gen. John Allen, the man in charge of the still-undeclared Isis war, supposedly someone who would push back against the more uber-militaristic elements in the Obama administration is stepping aside. Who his replacement will be is not known, but you can guess the drumbeat for someone who is even more aggressive will get louder by the day. What is happening in Syria is an absolute tragedy, and one can only hope that the western powers will welcome refugees with open arms, and that a potential negotiated settlement is still somehow possible to at least stop the carnage on one side of the war. But while there are proposals everywhere for more war, no one has explained how adding more military destruction to the equation would actually help."
"Whats a life worth, and to whom? Professor Stephen Hawking has said once more that he would consider ending his life if he felt he could no longer make a contribution to the world; and although its obvious that he means by the world his loved ones as well as the theoretical physics community, it does seem a high bar to set. Not many of us are much use to the world as a whole; almost everyone has a job in which they could be replaced without too much strain and that may nowadays disappear without warning.   Related: Stephen Hawking: 'I would consider assisted suicide'    The idea that life has an intrinsic value seems both essential to a civilised society and an absurd delusion. Value, after all, seems a subjective quality. That is not to say that it does not exist: but it is always value to someone. Value requires a valuer, so it would appear that if no one values you, you have no value. And why not, in that case, die? The answer that you have value to yourself, even if no one else cares, doesnt seem psychologically realistic. It is one of the clearest symptoms of depression that you feel other people have no use for you but if this feeling is justified it is also one of the most powerful drivers of depression and suicidal despair. People who claim to survive on the strength of their own self-esteem are exceptional and if theyre telling the whole truth they are probably psychopaths as well. The traditional Christian answer to the question of where value is found has been God “ the being who, when you have no earthly use, finds you valuable, and possibly even useful as well. Without God, as Nietzsche saw, people who have no earthly uses are no earthly use “ and even the quickest glance through the headlines will show you this is the way the world goes. A trivial but very telling example cropped up on the Daily Mail website earlier this week, with a story about the suffering of British holidaymakers whose Greek island was invaded by squalid migrants fleeing from the wars in Syria and Afghanistan. These people slept on cardboard in the open air where holidaymakers could see them. Although the piece was widely disparaged, I feel it did in a way accurately express the thrust of British refugee policy at the moment: those who are no use to the economy can stay away and die, preferably somewhere we cant see or smell them. OK, so perhaps people are only valuable within their own societies. After all, we dont expect Syrians to weep over the fate of British pensioners. And for most of the 20th century it seemed that society could replace God as the guarantor of value. That was one of the premises of the welfare state. But the welfare state and, indeed, society, have increasingly gone the way of God, as something optional and rather eccentric in which to believe “ certainly not anything that will punish you if you doubt its existence. So why should Stephen Hawking stay alive if he ever reaches the point where neither he nor those who love him see any point in his continued existence? Although this looks like a question that only he can answer, it turns out that he cannot answer it alone. No one could. At the risk of sounding like a French philosopher of the 1950s, one is led to the conclusion that we shouldnt be worrying about assisted dying, but about assisting each other to stay alive. This isnt a matter of exhortations, or of high-mindedness but of simple practical gestures and quotidian emotional support. Just possibly Auden was entirely realistic when claimed that we must love one another or die. ¢ You can contact Samaritans on jo@samaritans or 08457 909090"
"Some western nations opposed to President Bashar al-Assad have discussed security co-operation with his government, Syria said on Wednesday, a move which if true would suggest a rise in western concerns about foreign militants in rebel ranks.The UK government denied having any such co-operation with the Assad regime and the top US and French diplomats both said they were personally unaware of such contacts though did not go so far as to deny that any had taken place.Syria's deputy foreign minister Faisal Mekdad said several western intelligence services had visited Damascus for discussions. His comments were broadcast a day after the Wall Street Journal reported that French and Spanish spy services had made contact with Assad's government. French media have carried similar reports.""I will not specify [which countries] but many of them have visited Damascus, yes,"" Mekdad said in a BBC interview.Any suggestion that western countries were talking to Assad's government could complicate their relationships with opposition groups supported by the United States and Europe, and with wealthy Gulf states that fund the rebels.Asked about the report, US secretary of state John Kerry indicated he was not aware of such contacts.""I don't know anything about that, certainly not under my auspices,"" he told reporters in Kuwait, where he is on a visit.In Paris, French foreign minister Laurent Fabius declined to comment, although when pressed he said he had the ""same position"" as Kerry. The defence ministry declined to comment.The French newspaper Le Figaro reported in December that the DGSE external intelligence service had gone to Damascus to discuss cooperation on terrorists. Damascus had replied that it would do so if France re-opened its embassy, it reported.There was no immediate reaction from officials in Germany or Spain.Western powers have long supported Syria's opposition with rhetoric but the past year has seen a shift in emphasis, with countries backing away from material aid to the rebels as al-Qaida-linked groups have gained power in rebel-held regions.Western countries are worried about the presence in rebel ranks of foreign Islamist militants who have travelled to Syria to join a near three-year-old struggle to topple Assad.""Frankly speaking the spirit has changed,"" Mekdad said. ""Many of these countries have contacted us to coordinate security measures.""""When these countries ask us for security cooperation, then it seems to me there is a schism between the political and security leaderships,"" he added.Assad has always maintained that the uprising against him is run by terrorists and that western support for the rebels damages western countries' own interests."
"Some western nations opposed to President Bashar al-Assad have discussed security co-operation with his government, Syria said on Wednesday, a move which if true would suggest a rise in western concerns about foreign militants in rebel ranks.The UK government denied having any such co-operation with the Assad regime and the top US and French diplomats both said they were personally unaware of such contacts though did not go so far as to deny that any had taken place.Syria's deputy foreign minister Faisal Mekdad said several western intelligence services had visited Damascus for discussions. His comments were broadcast a day after the Wall Street Journal reported that French and Spanish spy services had made contact with Assad's government. French media have carried similar reports.""I will not specify [which countries] but many of them have visited Damascus, yes,"" Mekdad said in a BBC interview.Any suggestion that western countries were talking to Assad's government could complicate their relationships with opposition groups supported by the United States and Europe, and with wealthy Gulf states that fund the rebels.Asked about the report, US secretary of state John Kerry indicated he was not aware of such contacts.""I don't know anything about that, certainly not under my auspices,"" he told reporters in Kuwait, where he is on a visit.In Paris, French foreign minister Laurent Fabius declined to comment, although when pressed he said he had the ""same position"" as Kerry. The defence ministry declined to comment.The French newspaper Le Figaro reported in December that the DGSE external intelligence service had gone to Damascus to discuss cooperation on terrorists. Damascus had replied that it would do so if France re-opened its embassy, it reported.There was no immediate reaction from officials in Germany or Spain.Western powers have long supported Syria's opposition with rhetoric but the past year has seen a shift in emphasis, with countries backing away from material aid to the rebels as al-Qaida-linked groups have gained power in rebel-held regions.Western countries are worried about the presence in rebel ranks of foreign Islamist militants who have travelled to Syria to join a near three-year-old struggle to topple Assad.""Frankly speaking the spirit has changed,"" Mekdad said. ""Many of these countries have contacted us to coordinate security measures.""""When these countries ask us for security cooperation, then it seems to me there is a schism between the political and security leaderships,"" he added.Assad has always maintained that the uprising against him is run by terrorists and that western support for the rebels damages western countries' own interests."
" Rwanda, 1994. The nadir of many lows for UN peacekeeping. Hundreds of desperate Tutsis sought refuge on the first day of the genocide at a school where 90 UN troops were under the command of Captain Luc Lemaire. Here, they were surely safe from the Hutus and their machetes.  The UN flag flew over the school. The Belgian peacekeepers were armed with a machine gun, planted at the entrance. These soldiers were the worlds army. The Tutsis could not imagine they would stand by while people were slaughtered.  The 39-year-old captain feared otherwise. The UN in New York had ignored warnings that the genocide was being planned and the security council was pulling out peacekeepers in response to the mass killing.  Within days, the UN command decided there was more important work for Lemaire and his men than protecting Tutsis. The peacekeepers were ordered to abandon the school in order to escort foreigners to the airport and out of Rwanda.  As the soldiers left, Tutsis begged to be shot rather than left to the militias machetes. Within hours, the 2,000 people at the school were murdered by gun, grenade and blade. Lemaires contingent kept a sporadic video diary of the wretched events. At one point a shaky camera captures a sandbagged machine-gun post and a pickup truck of Hutu militiamen sweeping by.  The video then focuses on the soldiers log. It reads: New York didnt agree to change the rules of engagement. The peacekeepers were not to be permitted to save Tutsis. The cameras microphone picks up an anonymous voice: There are killings and New York doesnt give a damn. The betrayal of the Tutsis in Rwanda was a low point for UN peacekeeping but not an isolated one. A year later, Dutch peacekeepers failed to stop the massacre of 8,000 Muslim men in Srebrenica, a supposedly UN safe area, the most notorious mass killing by the Serbs in Bosnia.     General Ratko MladiÄ‡ of the Bosnian Serb army, left, drinks with Dutch colonel Ton Karremans, second right, in the Bosnian village of PotoÄ?ari, on 12 July 1995, the second day of the massacre.  Photograph: Anonymous/AP    Not long before, there had been the debacle in Somalia where a US-led UN humanitarian operation turned into a bloody conflict against a powerful warlord. By then Angola was already back at war after its UN peacekeeping mission collapsed amid accusations it contributed to the breakdown of peace.  Other disasters “ the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), Sierra Leone “ were still on the horizon even as the UN peacekeeping departments budget doubled and doubled again with growing numbers of missions.    Related: 70 years and half a trillion dollars later: what has the UN achieved?    There were good reasons to question the point of UN peacekeeping in the 1990s and to wonder if it was not costing as many lives as it was protecting by offering an illusion of security. The murdered Tutsis at the school might have stood a better chance if they had fled to Uganda. Two decades later, those responsible for peacekeeping “ UN officials, countries on the security council assigning missions, militaries contributing the forces in blue helmets “ say the lessons of the 1990s have been learned. Protection of civilian lives is now a priority. UN soldiers no longer have their hands tied in using force to defend the innocent. Perhaps most important, the failures of two decades ago stripped the UN of the illusion that an election and a few soldiers in blue helmets is enough to sustain peace. But even as peacekeeping has ballooned to become by far the most expensive of UN departments (in 2015 it will cost nearly $9bn to keep 120,000 blue helmet soldiers and policemen deployed in 16 countries from Mali to Cyprus and Haiti, compared with just $500m at the end of the cold war), it is dogged by challenges. The politics of the UN security council continues to hamstring action over some conflicts, such as Syria and Darfur. Other missions drag on indefinitely, such as in the DRC and Haiti. There is friction between the UN and some governments over who has ultimate command over peacekeeping troops, which has resulted in conflicting orders with disastrous consequences. Then there are spreading conflicts against armed Islamist groups in central and west Africa.   Peacekeepers around the world   In the last 15 years, the number of missions, number of crises have drastically multiplied, said Ban Ki-moon, the UN secretary general. In addition to using military and police forces, we have been deploying a lot of special political missions. This is preventative diplomacy. If we can prevent at the time of symptoms of a crisis, we can save a lot of human lives and human resources. Jack Christofides, who is on leave from the UN as director of peacekeeping operations for central and west Africa, described peacekeeping as extremely taxing at the moment. Weve got more troops, weve got a bigger budget, we deployed in all sorts of very very difficult places, much more difficult than weve ever been, and were stretched, were really stretched, he said.  If you think of the old deployments in places like Lebanon and Bosnia, there is a certain infrastructure you could use and work with. The troops coming were generally from countries that had the means to launch expeditions. Today, when youre talking about northern Mali and central Africa, you have both extremely dangerous conditions and geostrategic locations which are very difficult to get to. The UN is also grappling with persistent accusations of rape and sexual exploitation by its peacekeepers, which is further undermining confidence in the organisation, particularly in some of the countries where its soldiers are deployed.  And there are added demands as the US presses for peacekeepers to take on a more aggressive role, particularly against armed Islamist groups in Africa. President Barack Obama is jointly hosting a summit with Ban in New York later this month to seek commitments to strengthen peacekeeping with better trained troops, equipment and intelligence resources, to the alarm of some of the countries that provide substantial contingents of troops in blue helmets.      Indian soldiers gather before their departure to Sudan on a UN peacekeeping mission. Photograph: Raveendran/AFP/Getty Images    India, which has sent more soldiers on UN missions than any other country “ 180,000 on 49 missions “ is openly challenging the move towards what some see as mostly rich and powerful countries on the security council sending the poor to fight and die.  India is completely committed to peacekeeping provided peacekeeping is what we know it to be, said Indias ambassador to the UN, Asoke Kumar Mukerji. The soldiers in the blue helmets, under the blue flag, are impartial. They are not supposed to be partisan. If somebody wants soldiers to go in and fight they should hire mercenaries, not take UN soldiers. UN peacekeeping came into its own with the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 and the diminishing of ideological rivalries that had dominated international politics since the second world war. Early successes in Cambodia, Namibia, Mozambique and El Salvador generated an overconfidence in the ability of UN soldiers to keep the peace. Each of those countries had an accord that former warring parties wanted to maintain.  The UN learned the hard way in Angola, Rwanda and Bosnia that where the UN wants peace more than those in conflict, then the illusion of peacekeeping can perpetuate instability and cost lives.  Out of the disasters of the 1990s came a new model including an ethos of responsibility to protect. No longer would UN forces stand idly by while innocent people were murdered. That has helped drive a rapid expansion of peacekeeping to become the UNs single largest operation. In 1991, the year the Soviet Union collapsed, the peacekeeping budget was just $490m. Over the past decade it has leapt from $3.8bn to about $9bn as the size and length of missions has expanded. More than 100,000 UN peacekeepers have served in Haiti since 2004 and close to 250,000 been deployed to the DRC over the past 15 years. There is little prospect of either mission ending soon.   UN budgets   Today, UN troop deployments in the DRC, Sudan and Darfur each cost more than $1bn a year, with Mali and Central African Republic not far behind. The most expensive outside Africa is Haiti, with a budget of $500m.  The emphasis on Africa is in part a reflection of the enduring nature of some conflicts on the continent, but also the politics of the security council. The UN might have had large peacekeeping missions in Syria and Ukraine, were it not for Russian objections.  As the scale of peacekeeping has grown so have the questions about its role. Most particularly, are peacekeepers there to monitor peace or to enforce it? Its a source of increasing friction between the major powers on the security council that approve UN intervention and some of the countries which provide the troops.     A soldier from the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo sits on a personnel carrier next to a UN peacekeeper outside Goma. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images    In 2000, British forces landed in Sierra Leone after UN peacekeepers stood aside or fled an advance on the countrys capital, Freetown, by a notoriously brutal rebel group, the Revolutionary United Front (RUF). Several hundred peacekeepers surrendered to the rebels. A British general, David Richards, was sent in by London to evacuate foreign citizens. Confronted with the RUFs horrific record and the imminent killing of large numbers of civilians, he defied his instructions and used UK troops to spearhead a counter attack. Richards, who went on to become Britains chief of the defence staff, said he was staggered to find that the Indian UN force commander, Major General Vijay Jetley, interpreted his mandate as that of a neutral intermediary. In Richards view the UN should have been siding with the elected government against rebels breaking a peace agreement.  I had a real argument with Major General Jetley about this. The Indian hierarchy were very reluctant to lose a single person on a UN operation, said Richards. They were very reluctant to fight and that permeated quite a lot of the other contingents as well, to the point where I remember going in to the UN headquarters on my first day there in May 2000 and finding Jetley. I said General, weve got to stop the RUF, youve got to tell your people to fight. At least hold their positions. He was very reluctant to do it.  India said its troops were sent to monitor the peace, not enforce it. The UN mission in Sierra Leone was further complicated by antipathy between some of the national forces, particularly Jetley and his Nigerian deputy, Brigadier General Mohammed Garba.  In an internal UN report, Jetley accused Garba and other senior Nigerians of being more interested in smuggling diamonds than keeping the peace. Nigerias military responded by accusing the Indian general of trying to justify his ineptitude, inaction and inefficiency in the leadership of a multinational force.      An Indian UN soldier watches an RAF Chinook helicopter land at the UN headquarters in Freetown, Sierra Leone. Photograph: Peter Macdiarmid/AFP/Getty Images    Such differences of opinion over the role of UN peacekeepers were replicated 12 years later in the Democratic Republic of the Congo as rebels advanced on the eastern town of Goma. The Indian commander of part of the largest peacekeeping force in the world ignored orders from UN officials to defend the town and called the Indian defence ministry in New Delhi to ask what he should do. He was told not to resist. The rebels seized Goma to the anger of Ban Ki-Moon, who regarded it as a personal humiliation, according to a senior UN official. By then members of the wider UN mission in the DRC had come to look like bystanders to mass killing, rape and terror. Richard Gowan, until recently research director at the Centre on International Cooperation, a thinktank in New York that works closely with the UN on peacekeeping, said Indian forces in Sierra Leone and the DRC were taking orders from the defence ministry in New Delhi, not the UN commanders on the ground.  Its very clear that there are directions from New Delhi to avoid all risk, and that there are parallel lines of command between New Delhi and their guys in the field. Thats true of a lot of countries. A lot of field officers, if they get any order to take a significant risk in a peace operation, theyll immediately phone home. Thats making it almost impossible for some force commanders to get anything done because they have no true control over their own units, he said.   peacekeeper numbers   Most western nations will not put boots on the ground as frontline peacekeepers and so the UN is dependent on the goodwill of those countries prepared to deploy troops such as India, Bangladesh, Rwanda and Nigeria, making it hard to assert its authority. The UN lost confidence in Jetley in Sierra Leone but when the then secretary general, Kofi Annan, tried to remove him, the Indian government threatened to pull out all of its forces. Annans successor, Ban, ran into the same threats from New Delhi when he tried to remove the Indian UN commander after the Goma debacle. Rwanda and Srebrenica prompted a greater emphasis on protection of civilian lives, and involvement in rebuilding failed states instead of negotiating peace treaties, standing back and hoping it all worked out. Gowan said that while the responsibility to protect ethos was laudable it had also led to ill-thought-out missions. Sometimes in peacekeeping, the security council says ˜Good God we need to have a mission and that mission is stuck together, he said.     A convoy of the UN mission in Darfur crosses through a mud track in the southern village of Kashalongo, south of Nyala. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images    Gowan pointed to Darfur, where he said the UN intervention came as a politically panicked response to public pressure over the mass killings by the government-allied Janjaweed militia.  For political reasons the US and the UK insisted on having the mission. Ive spoken to UK officials since whove said: ˜We had no real idea what this mission was meant to do. We were just under such public pressure to come up with an answer and the answer was peacekeeping. That was definitely true for the Bush administration as well, he said. Darfur has been a quagmire from the beginning. The frank reality is no one believes that the mission is working but no one dares pull it out because they fear the moment it goes there will be an even greater spike in violence and the security council will be held responsible. Its become a slow burning disaster.   Philippe Bolopion , the UN director at Human Rights Watch, said the principal reason for the failure of the Darfur mission, a hybrid operation with African Union forces, was deadlock on the security council.  When permanent members of the security council cant agree to stand up to an abusive government such as Sudans, and you have weak peacekeeping troops on the ground, its almost a perfect storm where peacekeepers are not going to protect civilians properly, he said.     Members of the security council routinely prioritise national interests over the needs of the peacekeeping missions    Permanent members of the security council routinely prioritise their national interest over the needs of the UN peacekeeping missions they have mandated, as a result often undermining them. Russia and China have done this by opposing more sanctions against the Sudanese government even when it pushes peacekeepers around in Darfur. The responsibility to protect has had a more positive impact elsewhere. Peacekeepers in South Sudan turned their bases into de facto refugee camps protecting tens of thousands of people. That would have been unlikely 20 years ago. But the ethos has been severely challenged by the fallout from the security council mandate for military intervention in the 2011 Libyan revolution to protect civilians in Benghazi. Russia accused Nato of abusing it to support the overthrow of Muammar Gaddafi. That in turn has complicated UN action on Syria.      A UN flag flutters amid the rubble of the Lebanese-Israeli border town of Maroun al-Ras. Photograph: Patrick Baz/AFP/Getty Images    Finding common ground on sub-Saharan Africa has generally been less difficult because of fewer strategic rivalries. The debacle in Goma prompted the UN to put together a fighting force of soldiers prepared to go into combat. South Africa, Tanzania and Malawi volunteered to send troops to join the Force Intervention Brigade in part because they were weary of the persistent instability in the region.  We were all embarrassed, humiliated at the end of 2012 when Goma fell, said Christofides, who oversaw UN peacekeeping operations in the DRC from 2011 until earlier this year and was an architect of the intervention brigade. Everybody has that image of peacekeepers sitting on top of an APC [armoured personnel carrier] and this group of ruffians walking into Goma. That was a low moment for everybody. When we recommended the mandate of the intervention brigade, the security council did not need much persuading. You have some very far-reaching language in the mandate about targeted offensive operations. Thats not language you see in resolutions of the UN. Neutralising armed groups, preventing their expansion, disarming them. The UN also deployed drones for the first time to help monitor the movements of the rebels and to verify Rwandas denials that it was supplying the insurgents. The drones are not armed although that appears the next likely step, if not in the DRC then in some other conflict where the UN is involved, given their increasing use in the Middle East by the US and its allies. The intervention brigade has been successful in changing the dynamic in eastern Congo by pushing back the rebels and providing a degree of stability to begin the reconstruction of functioning systems of government, such as the courts “ although regional politics has played a large part too. But the operation has also deeply alarmed countries such as India, which fears it sets an example for the future of peacekeeping. Christofides doubts that the force intervention brigade provides a model for other peacekeeping missions. Senior UN officials, some of whom were strongly opposed to the creation of the brigade but now judge it a success, are deeply wary of the UN taking on a similar role in other conflicts. The DRC, they say, was a unique situation. But even if the force intervention brigade is not replicated, it fits with a wider agenda by the major western powers to remake UN peacekeeping as a partner in military campaigns. For them, the lesson of British intervention in Sierra Leone or the recent French deployments in Mali and Central African Republic against armed Islamist groups is that better trained and equipped forces launch the initial assault and then the UN comes in as backup. But for that to happen, UN peacekeeping has to up its game. Obama is leading the push with his New York summit on 28 September to seek pledges of troops, equipment and intelligence resources to a revamped peacekeeping operation. Washington regards peacekeeping as a national security issue and a good bargain, as one official put it. The US picks up the tab for a quarter of the UNs $9bn peacekeeping budget, but it is a fraction of the cost of the Pentagon or invading Iraq.  Moreover, if other countries are sending their forces then the US does not have to risk the lives of American soldiers. Previously, the US mostly regarded peacekeeping in Africa, in particular, as a humanitarian issue. Now, given the nature of the conflicts in Mali, Nigeria and Central African Republic, Washington views it as strategic.  But while the US wants more assertive peacekeeping, it does not want to send its soldiers to fight. Obama is pressing more developed countries, in Europe, Asia and Latin America, to make greater commitments in the hope of improving the quality of UN forces. So is Ban.     Cambodian mine experts demonstrate their work in the UN-controlled buffer zone in Cyprus. Photograph: Barbara Laborde/AFP/Getty Images    Im now in the process of reaching out to developed countries. Ive been speaking to many presidents and prime ministers to diversify the participation of peacekeeping forces, he said.  If we can diversify and have more countries, particularly some big countries, if they can send their own troops in addition to assets and financial support, that would be much appreciated. UN officials privately concede there is little chance of the US putting its forces under UN command. Congress would never stand for it. But Washington is joining the UN in pressing other developed countries to play a bigger part in peacekeeping. The UK currently has fewer than 300 soldiers deployed on peacekeeping missions, mostly in Cyprus. Weve been having goodness knows how many discussions with British officials with a view to getting them more involved, said Christofides. Were still drawing too many troops from a few parts of the world and not enough from other parts of the world. And I dont just mean Africa versus the west, but other countries in Asia and Latin America that could contribute a bit more.  Another senior UN official put it more bluntly: Britain has a reputation for lecturing without contributing. The UK is expected to announce a contingent of peacekeepers for South Sudan at the New York summit, but numbers are not known. Richards wants to see Britain make a greater contribution. The Ministry of Defence and, I have to say sadly, the armed forces, dont really see the UN as proper soldiering. This is a cultural ignorance thats grown up over many years. The Americans share it writ large: UN ops is what second- and third-world nations do but proper armies, we pick and choose, he said.  Richards said countries whose forces had experience in Afghanistan and Iraq could put that to good use in UN operations. I think thats a pretty good role for the British armed forces in this era when theres so many nasty things going on in the world. The Americans really need to decide to do it as well, he said. I think at a low level, our young officers would love to do it. There is a higher level political/military reluctance and snootiness about it.     A UN peacekeeper patrols in a street in Abidjan, Ivory Coast. Photograph: Issouf Sanogo/AFP/Getty Images    India strongly opposes a move towards more forceful peacekeeping. When it has been used as a tool to ensure that a peace agreement is observed so that peace building can take place, or as a tool to facilitate a political resolution, it works, said Mukerji, the Indian ambassador to the UN. But if peacekeeping is to be seen as peace enforcement, then unfortunately we cant see the UN charter allowing such a radical departure of the use of peacekeeping. Peacekeeping is not an end in itself. The end is political stability and peacekeeping is just a tool to bring about political stability. Whats happening now is the cart is being put before the horse. I think thats a very unfortunate development.  Gowan is sceptical for different reasons. I think that we may be stumbling into an enormous strategic trap because if we have learned over the last decade that very highly capable Nato forces, US forces, actually cant suppress Islamic extremist groups, why on earth do we think slightly strengthening UN missions is going to give us a tool that allows us to fight terrorists? he said. "
"The plight of the small town of Kobani has become the focus of the worlds attention amid the devastation and misery of Syria. With each day the reign of terror of Islamic State (Isis) has been moving too close for comfort. Its worth remembering that Kobani was not Isiss first target “ the extremists have overrun a vast terrain from Azzaz in Syria to Kirkuk in Iraq. Just as they have been driving the Kurds out of Kobani they have killed, intimidated and driven Turkomans out of Ã‡obanbey on the Turkish border; Arabs in Raqqa, Deir Ezzor and Mosul; Yazidis in Sinjar; and Christians in Aleppo. The tales of horror there are just as atrocious. With a 1,295km border with Syria and Iraq, this is a danger felt far more acutely by Turkey than any other country. It is a matter of the greatest national security to see the threat of extremism disappear from our neighbourhoods. We are ready, ableÂ and willing to do our part to this end “ after all, we know only too well theÂ toll of terrorism. Turkey will alwaysÂ be on the frontline in combating terror, including this new menace. We have opened up our borders and embraced all those from Kobani who wish take refuge in Turkey. We have provided Kobani with all the humanitarian aid possible. We have acted in full cooperation with the international coalition. We are also facilitating the passage of Kurdish peshmerga forces to Kobani. We will continue our contribution to saving the town so its residents can go back to their homes. Beyond Kobani, effective action requires a clear strategy and endgame. Everyone has to be prepared to play their part, and nobody should be left to bear the consequences alone. Isis is the product of a bigger evil. Not only the fertile ground offered by instability in Syria, but also the ardent support of the regime has helped terrorist groups grow. The regime was Isiss patron, with the intention that it would eradicate the Syrian opposition, together with the legitimate demands of the Syrian people. But Bashar al-Assads plan backfired. Isis grew out of control, fed by the territory and weapons it seized in Iraq. In Kobani, nearly 400 people have died in the past three weeks. In Syria, more than 200,000 people have died since the regime chose to wage war against its own people, moreÂ than three years ago. The regime has not hesitated to useÂ heavy artillery against civilian neighbourhoods or fire ballistic missiles. Airborne attacks and barrel bombs have become a daily routine. It evenÂ used chemical weapons. As long as this regime remains, Syria will not be stable and secure: violence, particularly terrorism, will continue to emerge “ the regime hasÂ no qualms about using any method that will keep it in power. The root causes must be tackled. Resolute and comprehensive action is required to achieve this, involving the establishment of a no-fly zone with safe areas in Syria to protect its citizens. Without it, any operation will be insufficient to eradicate the current threats. Our past warnings of likely outcomes both in Iraq and Syria regrettably fell on deaf ears. In Syria, the objective must be to make the regime understand that there can be no military solution to the conflict. The regime must engage in serious negotiations for a genuine and inclusive political transition that will lead to a real political change as envisaged by the Geneva conference of 2012. In Iraq, the aim must be to ensure the mistakes of the previous government are not repeated. Isis has been able to make such a rapid advance due to the environment created by the sectarian and oppressive policies of the past decade. As the new administration takes office, we have the chance to end that sectarianism and reason to be optimistic. In the meantime we will remain attentive to the needs of the Syrian and Iraqi people. Turkeys assistance is unprecedented. The number of Syrians from all ethnic and religious backgrounds who have fled and found refuge in Turkey continues to rise, and is now approaching 2 million people. Over the past couple of weeks 200,000 Syrians have arrived from Kobani. This burden has been appreciated in words but not in deeds. The costs so far have reached $4bn (Â£2.5bn), and Turkey cannot continue to act as if it were the United Nations. A collective responsibility to address Syrias plight, including a no-fly zone, becomes imperative. This is a serious challenge facing the entire world. The callous indifference should end. We should deal head-on with the international peace and security threats posed by Syria and Iraq. The world should no longer allow the Syrian regime to make a mockery of international law and order. History is made over such events. Good can always prevail over evil. WeÂ only need to help it happen."
"It was a hot London day and the U-shaped courtyard of the BBC in Portland Place was airless and sun-strafed. Light glared off pale stone. Employees crowded into a sliver of shade to eat their lunchtime sandwiches. The doors of the older, 1930s wing stood open, so that the wonky, stained little notice that sometimes hangs there bidding visitors welcome to the BBC, was invisible. On my many visits, I had enjoyed this intimate, ad hoc sign. It was so different from the portals of its neighbour, new Broadcasting House, opened in 2013, where there is nothing so improvised and human. Nor is there yet any poetic challenge to the soul, no inscription proclaiming this a temple of the arts, as there is in the foyer of the older building. Instead, images of BBC personalities “ a procession of men “ hang above the reception desk: the actors Benedict Cumberbatch and Martin Freeman in Sherlock guise; Idris Elba as Luther; and the physicist Brian Cox staring soulfully at the sun. I sat in the foyer of new Broadcasting House, watching the ebb and flow of staff as they made their exits and entrances, from among the other visitors waiting to be ushered through revolving doors to the inner chambers. Once there, suddenly illuminated by an uncanny reddish glow, you can look down into the newsroom thrumming away below you in the basement, or upwards to the glass walls that rise above. The newsroom should have had columns like great trees supporting it, according to the original vision of the architect, the late Sir Richard MacCormac, but along the way “ and amid acrimony “ the corporation dropped this flourish on budgetary grounds. The building seems to me to resemble the institution itself “ the new and the old tangled together in uncertain harmony; high artistic ambitions sometimes compromised; a certain corporate pomposity undercut by small, humane gestures. Dividing public opinion How healthy is the BBC of today? Will it flourish for another 92 years, and another? As I sat in the foyer, staff passes cheeping through the security barriers, I considered what I had learned about this corporation over the past 10 months. What had surprised me was its vulnerability. It may be a great vessel, but it is blasted and buffeted on every side by powerful and ruthless enemies. Its universality “ we all pay for it through the TV licence, and it is far and away the largest and richest cultural organisation in the country “ also renders it uniquely exposed. Its every move is monitored, analysed, discussed. A cadre of Fleet Street journalists exists solely to pick relentlessly over its bones, some of them, especially on the political right, spurred by deep-rooted political objections to the way the BBC is funded, and to the entire notion of the BBC as an ideological intervention in our national life. These principled objections are often complicated and intensified by commercial vested interests and the belief, rightly or wrongly, that if the BBC were stripped of its unfair advantages, their own businesses would flourish more fully. (James Murdoch, in his 2009 MacTaggart lecture at the Edinburgh television festival, talked vividly of the BBC as something we allow to throttle the news market and of the difficulties for private enterprise when the BBC is dumping free, state-sponsored news on the market.) Add to this public horror at the actions of the late BBC presenter Jimmy Savile and the outrage at the BBCs use of money at a time of national austerity (the Â£100m junked Digital Media Initiative, the payoffs to departing executives, and the remuneration of its highest-ranking employees and stars) and it is hardly surprising that the public discourse about the BBC is more often bitter and vituperative than thoughtful and subtle.     Gillian Anderson in BBC2 crime thriller, The Fall. Photograph: Steffan Hill/BBC/Artists Studio    And yet the passions roused by the BBC are so intense precisely because all of us have a relationship with it: 96% of us use it, including, of course, its most passionate detractors. It is with us in our homes, our cars, our phones, and on our computer screens; it is our omnipresent, intimate companion. High ideals meet slings and arrows Our relationship with the BBC has changed in recent years: we are in an age that has seen the fracturing of the media, and the BBC has found it necessary to head out into the world to find its audiences wherever they may be “ on the TV and radio, but also on apps, satellite and cable channels, and online. Once, the BBC represented a truly communal experience, when 20 million viewers would simultaneously watch Morecambe and Wise on a Saturday night. No longer. The BBC is not, as it once was, a cathedral in which we all gather together, but rather a many-roomed palace in which we are free to roam, where we will encounter others with whom to marvel at its riches, but through which we will nonetheless choose our own route, pace and narrative. Despite this increasingly fragmented experience, for most people the BBC is the national institution that most powerfully touches their inner lives “ working its way into our sense of ourselves as individuals and part of a community, our convictions, our imaginations. And if the screen is a kind of mirror into which the nation gazes, we are often in sharp disagreement about the accuracy of the reflection. The BBC is a space in which the most fundamental anxieties about cultural identity and political purpose can be fought out “ often bitterly. Every day the BBC citadel withstands the slings and arrows of the rightwing press and politicians. Papers such as the Daily Mail create the temper of the discourse around the BBC. Almost an official arm of New Labour, argued the papers editor Paul Dacre in his 2007 Hugh Cudlipp lecture [pdf], which he told me remains a fair summation of his views. By and large BBC journalism starts from the premise of leftwing ideology: it is hostile to conservatism and the traditional right. Arguably, though, the old Daily Mail taunt that the BBC was a nest of liberals, with an institutionalised leftwing bias, looks more and more difficult to sustain. Indeed, there are fears on the centre-left that the BBC has consciously or unconsciously drifted to the right, exhausted by the daily clamouring of its noisiest critics, and no longer quite holds the impartial centre. The bigger picture There are fears too that, still bruised a decade after its wrestling match with the last government over its coverage of the runup to the Iraq war “ a bout that ended with the resignation of both its director general, Greg Dyke, and its chairman, Gavyn Davies “ the BBC can be pusillanimous in some of its reporting, that it fears to challenge the most sensitive elements of the British establishment.     Edward Snowden. Would the BBC have run this story? Photograph: The Guardian/AFP/Getty Images    The BBC that withstood a 36-hour raid of its Glasgow headquarters by Special Branch in the 1980s over the Zircon affair (an investigation into a Â£500m spy satellite, the existence of which was unknown to the public accounts committee) feels like a distant memory to these critics, who would adumbrate the corporations reaction to the revelations by former US National Security Agency employee Edward Snowden. In the US, Australia, mainland Europe, especially Germany, in Asia, especially Indonesia, and in Latin America, especially Brazil and Mexico, the revelations concerning Prism and Tempora “ the secret programmes used for mass surveillance of email communication in the US and UK respectively “ were treated with real seriousness and provoked urgent public debate. The New York Times and the Washington Post regarded the story as of global significance. So did Channel 4 News. But Channel 4 News is, in the words of its editor, an ant versus Goliath when it comes to the BBC, with an audience of about 650,000. The BBC “ which by virtue of its sheer scale holds the ring of national debate “ remained almost mute. And so it was that of all the nations in the world, it was on its home turf that the Guardian remained virtually a lone voice. Meanwhile, its editor, Alan Rusbridger, was asked to prove his patriotism before a committee of MPs and GCHQ operatives arrived at the organisations offices to supervise the destruction of computer hard drives. The charge of pusillanimity is denied by Tony Hall, the director general of the BBC. I dont recognise that picture at all, he said. The fact is “ and this is one of the things I know about impartiality “ when people know a lot about a story, they kick up a big fuss because were not reporting it as they want us to report it. But then part of our job is to stand back from the furore and say: ˜Actually lets put this in context, lets do this properly. In that instance I dont see any pulling back at all. In other words, Hall, in the politest possible way, was accusing me of being biased “ that my questioning of the BBCs approach to this particular story, which won a Pulitzer prize for public service in the US, was engendered solely by its having been reported by my colleagues, rather than because it had touched on fundamental notions of privacy, human rights and the individuals relationship with the state.     Tony Hall, director general. Photograph: Dominic Lipinski/PA Wire/Press Association Images    Arguing for the bravery of the BBCs journalism, he pointed to the undoubted personal risks encountered by reporters in dangerous regions such as Gaza, Ukraine and Iraq “ and their principled determination to steer a straight course between passionately held, violently opposing views. The courage and integrity of foreign correspondents such as Jeremy Bowen and Lyse Doucet was, to me too, self-evident. I was thinking, rather, of a different order of danger: not personal, physical danger but danger to the BBC as an institution. Does the BBC really have the appetite, two years before it agrees a new charter and a new licence fee with the government, to go up against the British establishment at its most secret and powerful? Hall said: One of the things that has always amazed me about the BBC is that it is the most self-questioning organisation Ive ever worked in. It asks itself questions all the time about whether its doing the right thing, could we have done that better. In other words, his conscience is clear. Some weeks earlier, when I asked the BBC director of news and current affairs, James Harding, whether he would have run with the Snowden story if it had come directly to him, he argued that the issue was not that it touched on such delicate matters of state “ but rather that it was, he claimed, a piece of campaigning journalism that was invested in a particular outcome. I dont think the issue would have been whether the BBC could have gone after a story about the behaviour of a different part of the state “ of a part of the state, sorry ¦ Thats what you do if you cover the NHS, if you cover the police, if you cover the armed forces, if you cover the intelligence services ¦ I dont think thats an issue at all. I think the thing that is really tricky on Snowden is where you get yourself straddling a line between reporting a story and campaigning a story. Now, we obviously cannot campaign. We cannot use the publics money to make an argument. And the nature of that kind of leak and that kind of story was that the person who held the information wanted a certain story and to roll it out in a certain way. That deal, the deal between, if you like, the media organisation and the source “ Im not sure we could have done that deal ¦ So in my last job [as editor of the Times] I ran a campaign on something you may think as innocuous as cycling safety. You couldnt campaign on cycling safety at the BBC. And thats where things are different. However, there was no deal between the Guardian and Snowden to give the story a specific angle or to campaign for a particular outcome. Nor did Snowden bring an agenda to his whistleblowing beyond wishing to allow the public to enter a debate “ as he put it, to give society the chance to determine if it should change itself. The analogy drawn between the Snowden whistleblowing and the Timess (entirely laudable) cycling campaign seemed to me to be infelicitous. Unlike news organisations on the right, the Guardian does not rail against the evils of the licence fee nor thunder against its throttling of opportunity in the marketplace. But the BBCs importance in holding a line in its journalism cannot be overestimated. British civil society depends upon it. Dramatic licence and home truths If journalism is at the heart of the BBC, the matter by which it stands or falls, its television drama, is what most of us think of when we think of our own enjoyment of the BBC. This is personal territory. Each of us has our loves and prejudices, our notion of what is good and valuable. The comedy Mrs Browns Boys is not for me, but it was the highest-rating Christmas viewing for two years running, in 2012 and 2013, and for the BBC reaches a working-class, northern audience that it sometimes struggles to engage. My taste veers more to The Fall “ the BBC Northern Ireland drama starting Gillian Anderson “ and Line of Duty, Jed Mercurios taut cop show. But even as a passionate lover of detective stories and police procedurals, I could not help being faintly disquieted that all bar one of the shows (the exception being Stephen Poliakoffs latest drama, Dancing on the Edge) picked out for commendation by Hall in his foreword to the BBCs 2013 annual report were whodunnit genre pieces of one kind or another. Aside from The Fall and Line of Duty, he mentioned Sherlock, Top of the Lake and Sally Wainwrights terrific Happy Valley.     Jamaica Inn prompted complaints about inaudible dialogue. Photograph: Robert Viglasky/BBC/Origin Pictures    I contrasted this with the new writing I had seen at the theatre over the past months: a rambunctious, hyperreal satire on the press and police; a post-apocalyptic play, in which survivors attempt to recall scripts from the Simpsons, which meditates on the notion of collective memory, religion, myth and the history of theatre; a verse drama riffing off Shakespeares history plays imagining the accession of a future King Charles III; a bleak meditation on ideas of fame, celebrity and material culture filtered through the story of a pop star as he loses his individuality in a series of luxury hotel rooms; and an ideas-packed play that unravelled the impact of the Snowden revelations and examined ideas of personal privacy. In short, much as I had enjoyed and admired recent BBC drama, both in the quality of its writing and its extraordinary performances (especially from actors such as Keeley Hawes and Sarah Lancashire) it was in the theatre that I had found the most formally adventurous, exuberantly ambitious and unexpected original writing. Hall said he was keen to link BBC drama more strongly with British theatre “ that was one of the reasons he had recently invited Sir Nicholas Hytner, artistic director of the National Theatre, to become a non-executive director of the BBC. Hall must be getting used to being asked why the BBC is not producing drama comparable with House of Cards, Breaking Bad and The Wire, for he pre-empted any question along those lines by pointing out the differences in financial model between on-demand services such as Netflix on the one hand and the BBC on the other: For the price of two series of House of Cards weve done 70-plus hours of varied drama, he pointed out. (Two series of House of Cards works out at 24 hours of television.) For the consumer, there are enormous differences too. A subscription to Netflix, which at present produces a comparatively small amount of original work, costs about Â£83 annually, set against Â£145.50 for the licence fee, which grants access to all free-to-air British television and material live-streamed through iPlayer, ITV Player and 4oD. To my charge of too many whodunnits Hall pointed to the BBC adaptation of Hilary Mantels novel, Wolf Hall, planned for BBC2 in 2015, whose set he has recently visited. The actors Damian Lewis and Mark Rylance, he said, are not being paid the rates they could get elsewhere because they believe in the BBCs commitment to Wolf Hall. He added: I dont see why people polarise things and say its either all brilliant in America and Scandinavia and somehow the Brits have got it wrong. He believes that we should stand up for what Britains doing really well ¦ You know, Broadchurch, fantastic, he said, referring to ITVs cop drama starring Olivia Colman and David Tennant, which in May won more Baftas than the whole of BBC1 and BBC2 drama combined. It wasnt clear to me, though, that the question was about only these programmes extent and duration: the essential quality of The Sopranos (say) is not just that it ran for many seasons, but rather that the writing was so ambitious and so richly allusive (artfully referencing a whole filmic canon from Rossellini to Ford Coppola as well as Roman imperial history). Nor does a version of a bestselling, prize-winning novel that has already been successfully adapted for the stage, however excellent it may turn out to be, suggest startling originality.     Benedict Cumberbatch in Sherlock. Photograph: Robert Viglasky/PA    Hall also referred to the commissioning of a second tranche of Shakespeare history plays, a follow-up to the highly acclaimed The Hollow Crown season of 2012, for which Sam Mendes executive-produced films of Richard II, Henry IV parts one and two, and Henry V. Sir Richard Eyre, a former artistic director of the National Theatre and sometime governor of the BBC, directed the two Henry IV plays. He regards the whole episode with a certain scepticism. The commission was generated not by an enthusiastic drama department, he said, but by fiat from the then director general Mark Thompson, who decided that a strong cultural statement ought to be made by the BBC in the year of the London Olympics. It was not a popular idea [within the BBC]. I had absolutely nothing to do with the BBC at all until it was made, Eyre said. When I had a fine cut of my two films, I said I was going to show them on successive days at a preview theatre. And I couldnt get anybody from the BBC to come. They asked me to send tapes over to them. I said ˜No. Ive worked for a year on these, come to a preview theatre, watch it on the screen and then well discuss it afterwards. Then much to their surprise it was very well received and people were saying ˜Now we understand what the BBC does; this is the jewel in the crown of BBC. He laughed. Suddenly they were running after us. ˜He picked good people, and let them get on with it Michael Grade, once a controller of BBC1, later BBC chairman, thinks that its a thin period [for drama] at the moment. He shifted impatiently in his seat “ we were speaking near his office in Chelsea. How do you explain the fact that Jamaica Inn got on the air? he said, referring to the Daphne du Maurier adaptation that was criticised when it was aired in April for its sometimes inaudible dialogue. Somebody once said of me “ and Id love this on my tombstone “ ˜He picked good people, and let them get on with it. Thats the job. Nowadays, youve got hundreds of people crawling over it, most of them know cock all about anything, theyve never done anything. He went on: How do you explain the fact that Jamaica Inn gets on the air, and you cant hear a word anybodys saying? Question: how many BBC drama employees went on location? How many watched the rushes? How many went to the rough cuts? How many went to the fine cuts? How many went to the sound mix? How many people saw the finished version? And yet it ended up on the air. You can make terrible programmes: you can think of The Borgias, lots of horrible programmes on the BBC, but at least you could hear what they were saying. I mean that is unforgivable ¦ You cant understand how it could happen at the BBC. Has anybody been fired? Who are these people that passed that for transmission and wasted Â£3m of licence payers money?     Michael Grade: ˜You either believe in the BBC or you dont. Photograph: Fiona Hanson/PA Archive/Press Association Ima    Part of the problem, argues Grade, is that endless process has muffled the commissioning power of the old BBC impresarios, the television barons of yesteryear who had enormous power but who stood or fell by the quality of their shows. Today you dont know whos responsible for anything. Its so convoluted, the system ¦ Committees, eight signatures, e-submission, I mean whats going on? It should be all about editorship, about somebody owning the product in each area, and having the vision, and if theyre no good, if their batting average is not up to snuff, sorry chum, well get the next one in. James Graham writes for theatre (his This House was a huge success for the National) as well as for BBC radio and television. Things have changed vastly for the better over the past couple of years, he told me. I remember when I began, a feeling of impossibility of ever getting anything on. And I knew people whod made a living out of just developing TV that would never see the light of day and never get beyond a certain stage. Several years ago he spent a year developing a script for the BBC about young western travellers in Thailand, including spending time in the country. The script went back and forth endlessly, working its way through many drafts. Finally, staff were rotating, executives were moving to different places, and it lost momentum. And I dont even know if anyone has ever turned it down “ but it quietly died. The process was enervating. Id rather have been working in bars and writing plays that were definitely going to be made than spending all my time and energy on something that just never felt like it was going to happen. The development process used to feel a bit like a computer game. It was as if you had to pass all these different levels and these different baddies before you get to the big baddy at the end. He is much more optimistic, now. It doesnt feel like there are so many layers that you have to go to until you get to Ben [Stephenson, BBC head of drama]. Andrew OHagan, the novelist, essayist and playwright, has several projects in development in Hollywood. But he feels a quiet despair at the commissioning process even for BBC radio “ which operates as a structured, staged submission process taking several months from idea to green light. The relationship between the ˜talent and the broadcaster has become deranged. The pitching process has the effect of killing the thing you love; and because of that the BBC is falling out of touch with a whole generation of writers, he said. He compared the process with that on magazines such as the New Yorker, where editors are strongly empowered curators, forging relationships with writers, constantly questing outwards for new ideas; or indeed the commissioning process in British theatre. A clever commissioner should be trusted to make the programmes they want to make, he said. ˜Sustained by the goodwill of the faithful Bound up with the complaint of byzantine process and bureaucracy is a continued sense of disenfranchisement between the BBCs worker class “ including many of its journalists “ and its executives. I think the over-remuneration of people [under Thompson] was a huge mistake, Middle East editor Jeremy Bowen told me when we met in London between his trips to Syria this spring, and its caused massive damage to the BBC. Its caused it internally, because the vast majority of people who work at the BBC do not get brilliantly paid. But the massive salaries given to top management angered people on the shop floor, exaggerated the ˜them and us feeling that there was a chauffeur-driven top of the corporation with enormous salaries and massive bonuses. And that caused a lot of resentment and still does. I resented it personally. He added: I hope that might be a bit different under Tony Hall “ I think hes a sensible bloke ¦ But what I really resent about it too is the way its damaged us externally: its handed people who dont like the BBC sticks and stones to chuck at us, and thats a bad thing.     Morecambe and Wise, stars of communal Saturday night viewing. BBC    Hall has much to do as the charter-renewal process begins. The most important task, perhaps, is to argue the BBCs virtues on his own terms; to create the boundaries of the discussion in the way that, despite all the pain it caused internally (and perhaps because of it), John Birt did with his ruthless efficiency drive in the 1990s. Birts changes involved separating broadcast and production within the BBC and introducing an open market, Producer Choice, in which programme-makers were able to shop around externally for the best-value services, rather than necessarily using in-house provision. Hall is a Birtista by professional background (as a young man he was plucked from the ranks by the former director general to run BBC TV news). His most striking innovation as director general so far is a logical extension of Birts marketisation of the BBC: he has announced that he will allow the BBC and independent production companies to compete to make BBC television on equal terms, without quotas dictating the proportion of work available to them. The corollary is that he will also allow BBC production teams to pitch to broadcasters outside the BBC. He is thus beginning to seize the initiative, but there is much else to do “ not least, and this is a matter that Hall cannot resolve on his own, the quieting of the seemingly endless debate about the governance of the BBC. Much will depend on the choice of the new chair, a heavy responsibility for the Conservatives. At the moment, if rumours are to be believed, several plausible candidates have withdrawn from consideration. The job is starting to look like a poisoned chalice. Dame Janet Smiths review into the culture and practices of the BBC during the years that Savile worked there is an unexploded bomb that may damage the corporation when it is finally published, perhaps this autumn. I began to think of the BBC as if it were a church: supported by high ideals, feeding our inner lives, sustain"
